

===== SECTION 1.5: 1.5    •    Protocol Layers and Their Service Models         77 =====



===== SECTION 1.5: 1.5	 Protocol Layers and Their Service Models =====

From our discussion thus far, it is apparent that the Internet is an extremely com-
plicated system. We have seen that there are many pieces to the Internet: numerous 
applications and protocols, various types of end systems, packet switches, and vari-
ous types of link-level media. Given this enormous complexity, is there any hope of 
organizing a network architecture, or at least our discussion of network architecture? 
Fortunately, the answer to both questions is yes.
1.5.1	Layered Architecture
Before attempting to organize our thoughts on Internet architecture, let’s look 
for a human analogy. Actually, we deal with complex systems all the time in our 
everyday life. Imagine if someone asked you to describe, for example, the air-
line system. How would you find the structure to describe this complex system 
that has ticketing agents, baggage checkers, gate personnel, pilots, airplanes, 
air traffic control, and a worldwide system for routing airplanes? One way to 
describe this system might be to describe the series of actions you take (or oth-
ers take for you) when you fly on an airline. You purchase your ticket, check 
your bags, go to the gate, and eventually get loaded onto the plane. The plane 
takes off and is routed to its destination. After your plane lands, you deplane at 
the gate and claim your bags. If the trip was bad, you complain about the flight 
to the ticket agent (getting nothing for your effort). This scenario is shown in 
Figure 1.21.
Figure 1.21  ♦  Taking an airplane trip: actions
Ticket (purchase)
Baggage (check)
Gates (load)
Runway takeoff
Airplane routing
Ticket (complain)
Baggage (claim)
Gates (unload)
Runway landing
Airplane routing
Airplane routing

78         CHAPTER 1    •    COMPUTER NETWORKS AND THE INTERNET
Already, we can see some analogies here with computer networking: You are 
being shipped from source to destination by the airline; a packet is shipped from 
source host to destination host in the Internet. But this is not quite the analogy we 
are after. We are looking for some structure in Figure 1.21. Looking at Figure 1.21, 
we note that there is a ticketing function at each end; there is also a baggage func-
tion for already-ticketed passengers, and a gate function for already-ticketed and 
already-baggage-checked passengers. For passengers who have made it through the 
gate (that is, passengers who are already ticketed, baggage-checked, and through the 
gate), there is a takeoff and landing function, and while in flight, there is an airplane-
routing function. This suggests that we can look at the functionality in Figure 1.21 in 
a horizontal manner, as shown in Figure 1.22.
Figure 1.22 has divided the airline functionality into layers, providing a frame-
work in which we can discuss airline travel. Note that each layer, combined with the 
layers below it, implements some functionality, some service. At the ticketing layer 
and below, airline-counter-to-airline-counter transfer of a person is accomplished. At 
the baggage layer and below, baggage-check-to-baggage-claim transfer of a person 
and bags is accomplished. Note that the baggage layer provides this service only to an 
already-ticketed person. At the gate layer, departure-gate-to-arrival-gate transfer of 
a person and bags is accomplished. At the takeoff/landing layer, runway-to-runway 
transfer of people and their bags is accomplished. Each layer provides its service 
by (1) performing certain actions within that layer (for example, at the gate layer, 
loading and unloading people from an airplane) and by (2) using the services of the 
layer directly below it (for example, in the gate layer, using the runway-to-runway 
passenger transfer service of the takeoff/landing layer).
A layered architecture allows us to discuss a well-defined, specific part of a 
large and complex system. This simplification itself is of considerable value by 
providing modularity, making it much easier to change the implementation of the 
service provided by the layer. As long as the layer provides the same service to the 
layer above it, and uses the same services from the layer below it, the remainder of 
the system remains unchanged when a layer’s implementation is changed. (Note 
Figure 1.22  ♦  Horizontal layering of airline functionality
Ticket (purchase)
Baggage (check)
Gates (load)
Runway takeoff
Airplane routing
Airplane routing
Airplane routing
Ticket (complain)
Baggage (claim)
Gates (unload)
Runway landing
Airplane routing
Ticket
Baggage
Gate
Takeoff/Landing
Airplane routing
Arrival airport
Departure airport
Intermediate air-trafﬁc
control centers



===== SECTION 1.5: 1.5    •    Protocol Layers and Their Service Models         79 =====

that changing the implementation of a service is very different from changing the 
service itself!) For example, if the gate functions were changed (for instance, to have 
people board and disembark by height), the remainder of the airline system would 
remain unchanged since the gate layer still provides the same function (loading and 
unloading people); it simply implements that function in a different manner after the 
change. For large and complex systems that are constantly being updated, the ability 
to change the implementation of a service without affecting other components of the 
system is another important advantage of layering.
Protocol Layering
But enough about airlines. Let’s now turn our attention to network protocols. To 
provide structure to the design of network protocols, network designers organize 
protocols—and the network hardware and software that implement the protocols—
in layers. Each protocol belongs to one of the layers, just as each function in the 
airline architecture in Figure 1.22 belonged to a layer. We are again interested in 
the services that a layer offers to the layer above—the so-called service model of 
a layer. Just as in the case of our airline example, each layer provides its service by 
(1) performing certain actions within that layer and by (2) using the services of the 
layer directly below it. For example, the services provided by layer n may include 
reliable delivery of messages from one edge of the network to the other. This might 
be implemented by using an unreliable edge-to-edge message delivery service of 
layer n - 1, and adding layer n functionality to detect and retransmit lost messages.
A protocol layer can be implemented in software, in hardware, or in a combina-
tion of the two. Application-layer protocols—such as HTTP and SMTP—are almost 
always implemented in software in the end systems; so are transport-layer protocols. 
Because the physical layer and data link layers are responsible for handling commu-
nication over a specific link, they are typically implemented in a network interface 
card (for example, Ethernet or WiFi interface cards) associated with a given link. The 
network layer is often a mixed implementation of hardware and software. Also note 
that just as the functions in the layered airline architecture were distributed among 
the various airports and flight control centers that make up the system, so too is a 
layer n protocol distributed among the end systems, packet switches, and other com-
ponents that make up the network. That is, there’s often a piece of a layer n protocol 
in each of these network components.
Protocol layering has conceptual and structural advantages [RFC 3439]. As 
we have seen, layering provides a structured way to discuss system components. 
Modularity makes it easier to update system components. We mention, however, 
that some researchers and networking engineers are vehemently opposed to layering 
[Wakeman 1992]. One potential drawback of layering is that one layer may duplicate 
lower-layer functionality. For example, many protocol stacks provide error recovery 
on both a per-link basis and an end-to-end basis. A second potential drawback is that 
functionality at one layer may need information (for example, a timestamp value) 
that is present only in another layer; this violates the goal of separation of layers.

80         CHAPTER 1    •    COMPUTER NETWORKS AND THE INTERNET
When taken together, the protocols of the various layers are called the protocol 
stack. The Internet protocol stack consists of five layers: the physical, link, network, 
transport, and application layers, as shown in Figure 1.23. If you examine the Table 
of Contents, you will see that we have roughly organized this book using the lay-
ers of the Internet protocol stack. We take a top-down approach, first covering the 
application layer and then proceeding downward.
Application Layer
The application layer is where network applications and their application-layer pro-
tocols reside. The Internet’s application layer includes many protocols, such as the 
HTTP protocol (which provides for Web document request and transfer), SMTP 
(which provides for the transfer of e-mail messages), and FTP (which provides for 
the transfer of files between two end systems). We’ll see that certain network func-
tions, such as the translation of human-friendly names for Internet end systems like 
www.ietf.org to a 32-bit network address, are also done with the help of a specific appli-
cation-layer protocol, namely, the domain name system (DNS). We’ll see in Chap-
ter 2 that it is very easy to create and deploy our own new application-layer protocols.
An application-layer protocol is distributed over multiple end systems, with the 
application in one end system using the protocol to exchange packets of information 
with the application in another end system. We’ll refer to this packet of information 
at the application layer as a message.
Transport Layer
The Internet’s transport layer transports application-layer messages between application 
endpoints. In the Internet, there are two transport protocols, TCP and UDP, either of 
which can transport application-layer messages. TCP provides a ­connection-oriented 
service to its applications. This service includes guaranteed delivery of application-layer 
Figure 1.23  ♦ The Internet protocol stack
Transport
Application
Network
Link
Physical
Five-layer
Internet
protocol stack



===== SECTION 1.5: 1.5    •    Protocol Layers and Their Service Models         81 =====

messages to the destination and flow control (that is, sender/receiver speed matching). 
TCP also breaks long messages into shorter ­segments and provides a congestion-control 
mechanism, so that a source throttles its transmission rate when the network is con-
gested. The UDP protocol provides a connectionless service to its applications. This is a 
no-frills service that provides no reliability, no flow control, and no congestion control. 
In this book, we’ll refer to a transport-layer packet as a segment.
Network Layer
The Internet’s network layer is responsible for moving network-layer packets known 
as datagrams from one host to another. The Internet transport-layer protocol (TCP 
or UDP) in a source host passes a transport-layer segment and a destination address 
to the network layer, just as you would give the postal service a letter with a destina-
tion address. The network layer then provides the service of delivering the segment 
to the transport layer in the destination host.
The Internet’s network layer includes the celebrated IP protocol, which defines 
the fields in the datagram as well as how the end systems and routers act on these 
fields. There is only one IP protocol, and all Internet components that have a network 
layer must run the IP protocol. The Internet’s network layer also contains routing 
protocols that determine the routes that datagrams take between sources and destina-
tions. The Internet has many routing protocols. As we saw in Section 1.3, the Internet 
is a network of networks, and within a network, the network administrator can run 
any routing protocol desired. Although the network layer contains both the IP pro-
tocol and numerous routing protocols, it is often simply referred to as the IP layer, 
reflecting the fact that IP is the glue that binds the Internet together.
Link Layer
The Internet’s network layer routes a datagram through a series of routers between 
the source and destination. To move a packet from one node (host or router) to the 
next node in the route, the network layer relies on the services of the link layer. In 
particular, at each node, the network layer passes the datagram down to the link 
layer, which delivers the datagram to the next node along the route. At this next node, 
the link layer passes the datagram up to the network layer.
The services provided by the link layer depend on the specific link-layer protocol 
that is employed over the link. For example, some link-layer protocols provide reli-
able delivery, from transmitting node, over one link, to receiving node. Note that this 
reliable delivery service is different from the reliable delivery service of TCP, which 
provides reliable delivery from one end system to another. Examples of link-layer pro-
tocols include Ethernet, WiFi, and the cable access network’s DOCSIS protocol. As 
datagrams typically need to traverse several links to travel from source to destination, 
a datagram may be handled by different link-layer protocols at different links along its 
route. For example, a datagram may be handled by Ethernet on one link and by PPP on 

82         CHAPTER 1    •    COMPUTER NETWORKS AND THE INTERNET
the next link. The network layer will receive a different service from each of the dif-
ferent link-layer protocols. In this book, we’ll refer to the link-layer packets as frames.
Physical Layer
While the job of the link layer is to move entire frames from one network element to 
an adjacent network element, the job of the physical layer is to move the individual 
bits within the frame from one node to the next. The protocols in this layer are again 
link dependent and further depend on the actual transmission medium of the link (for 
example, twisted-pair copper wire, single-mode fiber optics). For example, Ether-
net has many physical-layer protocols: one for twisted-pair copper wire, another for 
coaxial cable, another for fiber, and so on. In each case, a bit is moved across the link 
in a different way.
1.5.2	Encapsulation
Figure 1.24 shows the physical path that data takes down a sending end system’s 
protocol stack, up and down the protocol stacks of an intervening link-layer switch 
Figure 1.24  ♦  Hosts, routers, and link-layer switches; each contains a 
­different set of layers, reflecting their differences in functionality
M
M
M
M
Ht
Ht
Ht
Hn
Hn
Hl
Ht
Hn
Hl
Link-layer switch
Router
Application
Transport
Network
Link
Physical
Message
Segment
Datagram
Frame
M
M
M
M
Ht
Ht
Ht
Hn
Hn
Hl
Link
Physical
Source
Network
Link
Physical
Destination
Application
Transport
Network
Link
Physical
M
Ht
Hn
Hl
M
Ht
Hn
M
Ht
Hn
M
Ht
Hn
Hl
M
Ht
Hn
Hl
M



===== SECTION 1.5: 1.5    •    Protocol Layers and Their Service Models         83 =====

and router, and then up the protocol stack at the receiving end system. As we dis-
cuss later in this book, routers and link-layer switches are both packet switches. 
Similar to end systems, routers and link-layer switches organize their network-
ing hardware and software into layers. But routers and link-layer switches do not 
implement all of the layers in the protocol stack; they typically implement only 
the bottom layers. As shown in Figure 1.24, link-layer switches implement lay-
ers 1 and 2; routers implement layers 1 through 3. This means, for example, that 
Internet routers are capable of implementing the IP protocol (a layer 3 protocol), 
while link-layer switches are not. We’ll see later that while link-layer switches do 
not recognize IP addresses, they are capable of recognizing layer 2 addresses, such 
as Ethernet addresses. Note that hosts implement all five layers; this is consistent 
with the view that the Internet architecture puts much of its complexity at the edges 
of the network.
Figure 1.24 also illustrates the important concept of encapsulation. At the 
sending host, an application-layer message (M in Figure 1.24) is passed to the 
transport layer. In the simplest case, the transport layer takes the message and 
appends additional information (so-called transport-layer header information, Ht 
in Figure 1.24) that will be used by the receiver-side transport layer. The appli-
cation-layer message and the transport-layer header information together consti-
tute the transport-layer segment. The transport-layer segment thus encapsulates 
the application-layer message. The added information might include information 
allowing the receiver-side transport layer to deliver the message up to the appro-
priate application, and error-detection bits that allow the receiver to determine 
whether bits in the message have been changed in route. The transport layer then 
passes the segment to the network layer, which adds network-layer header infor-
mation (Hn in Figure 1.24) such as source and destination end system addresses, 
creating a network-layer datagram. The datagram is then passed to the link 
layer, which (of course!) will add its own link-layer header information and cre-
ate a link-layer frame. Thus, we see that at each layer, a packet has two types of 
fields: header fields and a payload field. The payload is typically a packet from 
the layer above.
A useful analogy here is the sending of an interoffice memo from one corpo-
rate branch office to another via the public postal service. Suppose Alice, who is in 
one branch office, wants to send a memo to Bob, who is in another branch office. 
The memo is analogous to the application-layer message. Alice puts the memo 
in an interoffice envelope with Bob’s name and department written on the front 
of the envelope. The interoffice envelope is analogous to a transport-layer seg-
ment—it contains header information (Bob’s name and department number) and it 
encapsulates the application-layer message (the memo). When the sending branch-
office mailroom receives the interoffice envelope, it puts the interoffice enve-
lope inside yet another envelope, which is suitable for sending through the public 
postal service. The sending mailroom also writes the postal address of the sending 
and receiving branch offices on the postal envelope. Here, the postal envelope 

84         CHAPTER 1    •    COMPUTER NETWORKS AND THE INTERNET
is analogous to the datagram—it encapsulates the transport-layer segment (the 
interoffice envelope), which encapsulates the original message (the memo). The 
postal service delivers the postal envelope to the receiving branch-office mail-
room. There, the process of de-encapsulation is begun. The mailroom extracts the 
interoffice memo and forwards it to Bob. Finally, Bob opens the envelope and 
removes the memo.
The process of encapsulation can be more complex than that described above. 
For example, a large message may be divided into multiple transport-layer segments 
(which might themselves each be divided into multiple network-layer datagrams). 
At the receiving end, such a segment must then be reconstructed from its constituent 
datagrams.


===== SECTION 2.2: 2.2    •    The Web and HTTP         125 =====

­including servers that store and transmit videos, other servers that manage billing 
and other ­client functions, clients (e.g., the Netflix app on your smartphone, tablet, or 
­computer), and an application-level DASH protocol defines the format and sequence 
of messages exchanged between a Netflix server and client. Thus, DASH is only one 
piece (albeit, an important piece) of the Netflix application.
2.1.6 Network Applications Covered in This Book
New applications are being developed every day. Rather than covering a large 
number of Internet applications in an encyclopedic manner, we have chosen to 
focus on a small number of applications that are both pervasive and important. 
In this chapter, we discuss five important applications: the Web, electronic mail, 
directory service, video streaming, and P2P applications. We first discuss the 
Web, not only because it is an enormously popular application, but also because 
its application-layer protocol, HTTP, is straightforward and easy to understand. 
We then discuss electronic mail, the Internet’s first killer application. E-mail is 
more complex than the Web in the sense that it makes use of not one but sev-
eral application-layer protocols. After e-mail, we cover DNS, which provides a 
directory service for the Internet. Most users do not interact with DNS directly; 
instead, users invoke DNS indirectly through other applications (including the 
Web, file transfer, and electronic mail). DNS illustrates nicely how a piece of 
core network functionality (network-name to network-address translation) can 
be implemented at the application layer in the Internet. We then discuss P2P file 
sharing applications, and complete our application study by discussing video 
streaming on demand, including distributing stored video over content distribu-
tion networks. 


===== SECTION 2.2: 2.2	 The Web and HTTP =====

Until the early 1990s, the Internet was used primarily by researchers, academics, 
and university students to log in to remote hosts, to transfer files from local hosts to 
remote hosts and vice versa, to receive and send news, and to receive and send elec-
tronic mail. Although these applications were (and continue to be) extremely useful, 
the Internet was essentially unknown outside of the academic and research commu-
nities. Then, in the early 1990s, a major new application arrived on the scene—the 
World Wide Web [Berners-Lee 1994]. The Web was the first Internet application 
that caught the general public’s eye. It dramatically changed how people interact 
inside and outside their work environments. It elevated the Internet from just one of 
many data networks to essentially the one and only data network.
Perhaps what appeals the most to users is that the Web operates on demand. 
Users receive what they want, when they want it. This is unlike traditional broadcast 

126         CHAPTER 2    •    APPLICATION LAYER
radio and television, which force users to tune in when the content provider makes 
the content available. In addition to being available on demand, the Web has many 
other wonderful features that people love and cherish. It is enormously easy for any 
individual to make information available over the Web—everyone can become a 
publisher at extremely low cost. Hyperlinks and search engines help us navigate 
through an ocean of information. Photos and videos stimulate our senses. Forms, 
JavaScript, video, and many other devices enable us to interact with pages and sites. 
And the Web and its protocols serve as a platform for YouTube, Web-based e-mail 
(such as Gmail), and most mobile Internet applications, including Instagram and 
Google Maps.
2.2.1 Overview of HTTP
The HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP), the Web’s application-layer protocol, 
is at the heart of the Web. It is defined in [RFC 1945], [RFC 7230] and [RFC 7540]. 
HTTP is implemented in two programs: a client program and a server program. The 
client program and server program, executing on different end systems, talk to each 
other by exchanging HTTP messages. HTTP defines the structure of these messages 
and how the client and server exchange the messages. Before explaining HTTP in 
detail, we should review some Web terminology.
A Web page (also called a document) consists of objects. An object is 
­simply a file—such as an HTML file, a JPEG image, a Javascrpt file, a CCS 
style sheet file, or a video clip—that is addressable by a single URL. Most Web 
pages consist of a base HTML file and several referenced objects. For example, 
if a Web page contains HTML text and five JPEG images, then the Web page has 
six objects: the base HTML file plus the five images. The base HTML file refer-
ences the other objects in the page with the objects’ URLs. Each URL has two 
components: the hostname of the server that houses the object and the object’s 
path name. For example, the URL
http://www.someSchool.edu/someDepartment/picture.gif
has www.someSchool.edu for a hostname and /someDepartment/picture.
gif for a path name. Because Web browsers (such as Internet Explorer and Chrome) 
implement the client side of HTTP, in the context of the Web, we will use the words 
browser and client interchangeably. Web servers, which implement the server side 
of HTTP, house Web objects, each addressable by a URL. Popular Web servers 
include Apache and Microsoft Internet Information Server.
HTTP defines how Web clients request Web pages from Web servers and how 
servers transfer Web pages to clients. We discuss the interaction between client 
and server in detail later, but the general idea is illustrated in Figure 2.6. When a 
user requests a Web page (for example, clicks on a hyperlink), the browser sends 



===== SECTION 2.2: 2.2    •    The Web and HTTP         127 =====

HTTP request messages for the objects in the page to the server. The server receives 
the requests and responds with HTTP response messages that contain the objects.
HTTP uses TCP as its underlying transport protocol (rather than running on top 
of UDP). The HTTP client first initiates a TCP connection with the server. Once the 
connection is established, the browser and the server processes access TCP through 
their socket interfaces. As described in Section 2.1, on the client side the socket inter-
face is the door between the client process and the TCP connection; on the server side 
it is the door between the server process and the TCP connection. The client sends 
HTTP request messages into its socket interface and receives HTTP response mes-
sages from its socket interface. Similarly, the HTTP server receives request messages 
from its socket interface and sends response messages into its socket interface. Once 
the client sends a message into its socket interface, the message is out of the client’s 
hands and is “in the hands” of TCP. Recall from Section 2.1 that TCP provides a 
reliable data transfer service to HTTP. This implies that each HTTP request message 
sent by a client process eventually arrives intact at the server; similarly, each HTTP 
response message sent by the server process eventually arrives intact at the client. 
Here we see one of the great advantages of a layered architecture—HTTP need not 
worry about lost data or the details of how TCP recovers from loss or reordering of 
data within the network. That is the job of TCP and the protocols in the lower layers 
of the protocol stack.
It is important to note that the server sends requested files to clients without 
storing any state information about the client. If a particular client asks for the same 
object twice in a period of a few seconds, the server does not respond by saying 
that it just served the object to the client; instead, the server resends the object, as 
it has completely forgotten what it did earlier. Because an HTTP server maintains 
HTTP request
HTTP response
HTTP response
HTTP request
PC running
Internet Explorer
Android smartphone
running Google Chrome
Server running
Apache Web server
Figure 2.6  ♦  HTTP request-response behavior

128         CHAPTER 2    •    APPLICATION LAYER
no information about the clients, HTTP is said to be a stateless protocol. We also 
remark that the Web uses the client-server application architecture, as described in 
Section 2.1. A Web server is always on, with a fixed IP address, and it services 
requests from potentially millions of different browsers.
The original version of HTTP is called HTTP/1.0 and dates back to the early 
1990’s [RFC 1945]. As of 2020, the majority of HTTP transactions take place over 
HTTP/1.1 [RFC 7230]. However, increasingly browsers and Web servers also sup-
port a new version of HTTP called HTTP/2 [RFC 7540]. At the end of this section, 
we’ll provide an introduction to HTTP/2.
2.2.2 Non-Persistent and Persistent Connections
In many Internet applications, the client and server communicate for an extended 
period of time, with the client making a series of requests and the server respond-
ing to each of the requests. Depending on the application and on how the 
application is being used, the series of requests may be made back-to-back, peri-
odically at regular intervals, or intermittently. When this client-server interaction 
is taking place over TCP, the application developer needs to make an important 
decision—should each request/response pair be sent over a separate TCP connec-
tion, or should all of the requests and their corresponding responses be sent over 
the same TCP connection? In the former approach, the application is said to use 
non-persistent connections; and in the latter approach, persistent connections. To 
gain a deep understanding of this design issue, let’s examine the advantages and dis-
advantages of persistent connections in the context of a specific application, namely, 
HTTP, which can use both non-persistent connections and persistent connections. 
Although HTTP uses persistent connections in its default mode, HTTP clients and 
servers can be configured to use non-persistent connections instead.
HTTP with Non-Persistent Connections
Let’s walk through the steps of transferring a Web page from server to client for the 
case of non-persistent connections. Let’s suppose the page consists of a base HTML 
file and 10 JPEG images, and that all 11 of these objects reside on the same server. 
Further suppose the URL for the base HTML file is
http://www.someSchool.edu/someDepartment/home.index
Here is what happens:
	1.	 The HTTP client process initiates a TCP connection to the server 
www.someSchool.edu on port number 80, which is the default port number 
for HTTP. Associated with the TCP connection, there will be a socket at the 
client and a socket at the server.



===== SECTION 2.2: 2.2    •    The Web and HTTP         129 =====

	2.	 The HTTP client sends an HTTP request message to the server via its socket. 
The request message includes the path name /someDepartment/home 
.index. (We will discuss HTTP messages in some detail below.)
	3.	 The HTTP server process receives the request message via its socket, retrieves 
the object /someDepartment/home.index from its storage (RAM or 
disk), encapsulates the object in an HTTP response message, and sends the 
response message to the client via its socket.
	4.	 The HTTP server process tells TCP to close the TCP connection. (But TCP 
doesn’t actually terminate the connection until it knows for sure that the client 
has received the response message intact.)
	5.	 The HTTP client receives the response message. The TCP connection termi-
nates. The message indicates that the encapsulated object is an HTML file. The 
client extracts the file from the response message, examines the HTML file, and 
finds references to the 10 JPEG objects.
	6.	 The first four steps are then repeated for each of the referenced JPEG objects.
As the browser receives the Web page, it displays the page to the user. Two 
different browsers may interpret (that is, display to the user) a Web page in some-
what different ways. HTTP has nothing to do with how a Web page is interpreted 
by a client. The HTTP specifications ([RFC 1945] and [RFC 7540]) define only the 
communication protocol between the client HTTP program and the server HTTP 
program.
The steps above illustrate the use of non-persistent connections, where each 
TCP connection is closed after the server sends the object—the connection does not 
persist for other objects. HTTP/1.0 employes non-persistent TCP connections. Note 
that each non-persistent TCP connection transports exactly one request message and 
one response message. Thus, in this example, when a user requests the Web page, 11 
TCP connections are generated.
In the steps described above, we were intentionally vague about whether the 
client obtains the 10 JPEGs over 10 serial TCP connections, or whether some of the 
JPEGs are obtained over parallel TCP connections. Indeed, users can configure some 
browsers to control the degree of parallelism. Browsers may open multiple TCP con-
nections and request different parts of the Web page over the multiple connections. As 
we’ll see in the next chapter, the use of parallel connections shortens the response time.
Before continuing, let’s do a back-of-the-envelope calculation to estimate the 
amount of time that elapses from when a client requests the base HTML file until 
the entire file is received by the client. To this end, we define the round-trip time 
(RTT), which is the time it takes for a small packet to travel from client to server 
and then back to the client. The RTT includes packet-propagation delays, packet-
queuing delays in intermediate routers and switches, and packet-processing delays. 
(These delays were discussed in Section 1.4.) Now consider what happens when 
a user clicks on a hyperlink. As shown in Figure 2.7, this causes the browser to 
initiate a TCP connection between the browser and the Web server; this involves 

130         CHAPTER 2    •    APPLICATION LAYER
a “three-way handshake”—the client sends a small TCP segment to the server, the 
server acknowledges and responds with a small TCP segment, and, finally, the cli-
ent acknowledges back to the server. The first two parts of the three-way handshake 
take one RTT. After completing the first two parts of the handshake, the client sends 
the HTTP request message combined with the third part of the three-way handshake 
(the acknowledgment) into the TCP connection. Once the request message arrives at 
the server, the server sends the HTML file into the TCP connection. This HTTP 
request/response eats up another RTT. Thus, roughly, the total response time is two 
RTTs plus the transmission time at the server of the HTML file.
HTTP with Persistent Connections
Non-persistent connections have some shortcomings. First, a brand-new connection 
must be established and maintained for each requested object. For each of these 
connections, TCP buffers must be allocated and TCP variables must be kept in both 
the client and server. This can place a significant burden on the Web server, which 
may be serving requests from hundreds of different clients simultaneously. Second, 
Time
at client
Time
at server
Initiate TCP
connection
RTT
Request ﬁle
RTT
Entire ﬁle received
Time to transmit ﬁle
Figure 2.7  ♦  Back-of-the-envelope calculation for the time needed  
to request and receive an HTML file



===== SECTION 2.2: 2.2    •    The Web and HTTP         131 =====

as we just described, each object suffers a delivery delay of two RTTs—one RTT to 
establish the TCP connection and one RTT to request and receive an object.
With HTTP/1.1 persistent connections, the server leaves the TCP connection 
open after sending a response. Subsequent requests and responses between the same 
client and server can be sent over the same connection. In particular, an entire Web 
page (in the example above, the base HTML file and the 10 images) can be sent over 
a single persistent TCP connection. Moreover, multiple Web pages residing on the 
same server can be sent from the server to the same client over a single persistent 
TCP connection. These requests for objects can be made back-to-back, without wait-
ing for replies to pending requests (pipelining). Typically, the HTTP server closes 
a connection when it isn’t used for a certain time (a configurable timeout interval). 
When the server receives the back-to-back requests, it sends the objects back-to-
back. The default mode of HTTP uses persistent connections with pipelining. We’ll 
quantitatively compare the performance of non-persistent and persistent connections 
in the homework problems of Chapters 2 and 3. You are also encouraged to see 
[Heidemann 1997; Nielsen 1997; RFC 7540].
2.2.3 HTTP Message Format
The HTTP specifications [RFC 1945; RFC 7230; RFC 7540] include the definitions 
of the HTTP message formats. There are two types of HTTP messages, request mes-
sages and response messages, both of which are discussed below.
HTTP Request Message
Below we provide a typical HTTP request message:
GET /somedir/page.html HTTP/1.1
Host: www.someschool.edu
Connection: close
User-agent: Mozilla/5.0
Accept-language: fr
We can learn a lot by taking a close look at this simple request message. First of 
all, we see that the message is written in ordinary ASCII text, so that your ordinary 
computer-literate human being can read it. Second, we see that the message consists 
of five lines, each followed by a carriage return and a line feed. The last line is fol-
lowed by an additional carriage return and line feed. Although this particular request 
message has five lines, a request message can have many more lines or as few as 
one line. The first line of an HTTP request message is called the request line; the 
subsequent lines are called the header lines. The request line has three fields: the 
method field, the URL field, and the HTTP version field. The method field can take 
on several different values, including GET, POST, HEAD, PUT, and DELETE. 

132         CHAPTER 2    •    APPLICATION LAYER
The great majority of HTTP request messages use the GET method. The GET method 
is used when the browser requests an object, with the requested object identified in 
the URL field. In this example, the browser is requesting the object /somedir/
page.html. The version is self-explanatory; in this example, the browser imple-
ments version HTTP/1.1.
Now let’s look at the header lines in the example. The header line Host: 
www.someschool.edu specifies the host on which the object resides. You might 
think that this header line is unnecessary, as there is already a TCP connection in 
place to the host. But, as we’ll see in Section 2.2.5, the information provided by the 
host header line is required by Web proxy caches. By including the Connection: 
close header line, the browser is telling the server that it doesn’t want to bother 
with persistent connections; it wants the server to close the connection after sending 
the requested object. The User-agent: header line specifies the user agent, that 
is, the browser type that is making the request to the server. Here the user agent is 
Mozilla/5.0, a Firefox browser. This header line is useful because the server can actu-
ally send different versions of the same object to different types of user agents. (Each 
of the versions is addressed by the same URL.) Finally, the Accept-language: 
header indicates that the user prefers to receive a French version of the object, if such 
an object exists on the server; otherwise, the server should send its default version. 
The Accept-language: header is just one of many content negotiation headers 
available in HTTP.
Having looked at an example, let’s now look at the general format of a request 
message, as shown in Figure 2.8. We see that the general format closely follows our 
earlier example. You may have noticed, however, that after the header lines (and the 
additional carriage return and line feed) there is an “entity body.” The entity body 
method
sp
sp
cr
lf
cr
lf
header ﬁeld name:
Header lines
Blank line
Entity body
Request line
value
sp
cr
lf
cr
lf
header ﬁeld name:
value
sp
URL
Version
Figure 2.8  ♦  General format of an HTTP request message



===== SECTION 2.2: 2.2    •    The Web and HTTP         133 =====

is empty with the GET method, but is used with the POST method. An HTTP client 
often uses the POST method when the user fills out a form—for example, when a 
user provides search words to a search engine. With a POST message, the user is still 
requesting a Web page from the server, but the specific contents of the Web page 
depend on what the user entered into the form fields. If the value of the method field 
is POST, then the entity body contains what the user entered into the form fields.
We would be remiss if we didn’t mention that a request generated with a form 
does not necessarily have to use the POST method. Instead, HTML forms often use 
the GET method and include the inputted data (in the form fields) in the requested 
URL. For example, if a form uses the GET method, has two fields, and the inputs to 
the two fields are monkeys and bananas, then the URL will have the structure 
www.somesite.com/animalsearch?monkeys&bananas. In your day-to-
day Web surfing, you have probably noticed extended URLs of this sort.
The HEAD method is similar to the GET method. When a server receives a 
request with the HEAD method, it responds with an HTTP message but it leaves out 
the requested object. Application developers often use the HEAD method for debug-
ging. The PUT method is often used in conjunction with Web publishing tools. It 
allows a user to upload an object to a specific path (directory) on a specific Web 
server. The PUT method is also used by applications that need to upload objects 
to Web servers. The DELETE method allows a user, or an application, to delete an 
object on a Web server.
HTTP Response Message
Below we provide a typical HTTP response message. This response message could 
be the response to the example request message just discussed.
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Connection: close
Date: Tue, 18 Aug 2015 15:44:04 GMT
Server: Apache/2.2.3 (CentOS)
Last-Modified: Tue, 18 Aug 2015 15:11:03 GMT
Content-Length: 6821
Content-Type: text/html 
(data data data data data ...)
Let’s take a careful look at this response message. It has three sections: an initial 
status line, six header lines, and then the entity body. The entity body is the meat 
of the message—it contains the requested object itself (represented by data data 
data data data ...). The status line has three fields: the protocol version 
field, a status code, and a corresponding status message. In this example, the status 
line indicates that the server is using HTTP/1.1 and that everything is OK (that is, the 
server has found, and is sending, the requested object).

134         CHAPTER 2    •    APPLICATION LAYER
Now let’s look at the header lines. The server uses the Connection: close 
header line to tell the client that it is going to close the TCP connection after sending 
the message. The Date: header line indicates the time and date when the HTTP 
response was created and sent by the server. Note that this is not the time when 
the object was created or last modified; it is the time when the server retrieves the 
object from its file system, inserts the object into the response message, and sends the 
response message. The Server: header line indicates that the message was gener-
ated by an Apache Web server; it is analogous to the User-agent: header line in 
the HTTP request message. The Last-Modified: header line indicates the time 
and date when the object was created or last modified. The Last-Modified: 
header, which we will soon cover in more detail, is critical for object caching, both 
in the local client and in network cache servers (also known as proxy servers). The 
Content-Length: header line indicates the number of bytes in the object being 
sent. The Content-Type: header line indicates that the object in the entity body 
is HTML text. (The object type is officially indicated by the Content-Type: 
header and not by the file extension.)
Having looked at an example, let’s now examine the general format of a response 
message, which is shown in Figure 2.9. This general format of the response message 
matches the previous example of a response message. Let’s say a few additional words 
about status codes and their phrases. The status code and associated phrase indicate 
the result of the request. Some common status codes and associated phrases include:
•	 200 OK: Request succeeded and the information is returned in the response.
•	 301 Moved Permanently: Requested object has been permanently moved; 
the new URL is specified in Location: header of the response message. The 
client software will automatically retrieve the new URL.
version
sp
sp
cr
lf
cr
lf
header ﬁeld name:
Header lines
Blank line
Entity body
Status line
value
cr
sp
sp
lf
cr
lf
header ﬁeld name:
value
status code
phrase
Figure 2.9  ♦  General format of an HTTP response message



===== SECTION 2.2: 2.2    •    The Web and HTTP         135 =====

•	 400 Bad Request: This is a generic error code indicating that the request 
could not be understood by the server.
•	 404 Not Found: The requested document does not exist on this server.
•	 505 HTTP Version Not Supported: The requested HTTP protocol ver-
sion is not supported by the server.
How would you like to see a real HTTP response message? This is highly rec-
ommended and very easy to do! First Telnet into your favorite Web server. Then 
type in a one-line request message for some object that is housed on the server. For 
example, if you have access to a command prompt, type:
telnet gaia.cs.umass.edu 80 
GET /kurose_ross/interactive/index.php HTTP/1.1
Host: gaia.cs.umass.edu
(Press the carriage return twice after typing the last line.) This opens a TCP con-
nection to port 80 of the host gaia.cs.umass.edu and then sends the HTTP 
request message. You should see a response message that includes the base HTML 
file for the interactive homework problems for this textbook. If you’d rather just see 
the HTTP message lines and not receive the object itself, replace GET with HEAD.
In this section, we discussed a number of header lines that can be used within 
HTTP request and response messages. The HTTP specification defines many, 
many more header lines that can be inserted by browsers, Web servers, and net-
work cache servers. We have covered only a small number of the totality of header 
lines. We’ll cover a few more below and another small number when we discuss 
network Web caching in Section 2.2.5. A highly readable and comprehensive dis-
cussion of the HTTP protocol, including its headers and status codes, is given in 
[Krishnamurthy 2001].
How does a browser decide which header lines to include in a request message? 
How does a Web server decide which header lines to include in a response mes-
sage? A browser will generate header lines as a function of the browser type and 
version, the user configuration of the browser and whether the browser currently 
has a cached, but possibly out-of-date, version of the object. Web servers behave 
similarly: There are different products, versions, and configurations, all of which 
influence which header lines are included in response messages.
2.2.4 User-Server Interaction: Cookies
We mentioned above that an HTTP server is stateless. This simplifies server design 
and has permitted engineers to develop high-performance Web servers that can han-
dle thousands of simultaneous TCP connections. However, it is often desirable for 
a Web site to identify users, either because the server wishes to restrict user access 
Using Wireshark to 
investigate the HTTP 
protocol
VideoNote

136         CHAPTER 2    •    APPLICATION LAYER
or because it wants to serve content as a function of the user identity. For these pur-
poses, HTTP uses cookies. Cookies, defined in [RFC 6265], allow sites to keep track 
of users. Most major commercial Web sites use cookies today.
As shown in Figure 2.10, cookie technology has four components: (1) a cookie 
header line in the HTTP response message; (2) a cookie header line in the HTTP 
request message; (3) a cookie file kept on the user’s end system and managed by 
the user’s browser; and (4) a back-end database at the Web site. Using Figure 2.10, 
let’s walk through an example of how cookies work. Suppose Susan, who always 
Client host
Server host
usual http request msg
usual http response
Set-cookie: 1678
usual http request msg
cookie: 1678
usual http response msg
usual http request msg
cookie: 1678
usual http response msg
Time
One week later
ebay: 8734
Server creates
ID 1678 for user
Time
Cookie ﬁle
Key:
amazon: 1678
ebay: 8734
amazon: 1678
ebay: 8734
Cookie-speciﬁc
action
access
access
entry in backend
database
Cookie-speciﬁc
action
Figure 2.10  ♦  Keeping user state with cookies



===== SECTION 2.2: 2.2    •    The Web and HTTP         137 =====

accesses the Web using Internet Explorer from her home PC, contacts Amazon.com 
for the first time. Let us suppose that in the past she has already visited the eBay site. 
When the request comes into the Amazon Web server, the server creates a unique 
identification number and creates an entry in its back-end database that is indexed 
by the identification number. The Amazon Web server then responds to Susan’s 
browser, including in the HTTP response a Set-cookie: header, which contains 
the identification number. For example, the header line might be:
Set-cookie: 1678
When Susan’s browser receives the HTTP response message, it sees the 
Set-cookie: header. The browser then appends a line to the special cookie file 
that it manages. This line includes the hostname of the server and the identification 
number in the Set-cookie: header. Note that the cookie file already has an entry 
for eBay, since Susan has visited that site in the past. As Susan continues to browse 
the Amazon site, each time she requests a Web page, her browser consults her cookie 
file, extracts her identification number for this site, and puts a cookie header line that 
includes the identification number in the HTTP request. Specifically, each of her 
HTTP requests to the Amazon server includes the header line:
Cookie: 1678
In this manner, the Amazon server is able to track Susan’s activity at the Amazon 
site. Although the Amazon Web site does not necessarily know Susan’s name, it 
knows exactly which pages user 1678 visited, in which order, and at what times! 
Amazon uses cookies to provide its shopping cart service—Amazon can maintain a 
list of all of Susan’s intended purchases, so that she can pay for them collectively at 
the end of the session.
If Susan returns to Amazon’s site, say, one week later, her browser will con-
tinue to put the header line Cookie: 1678 in the request messages. Amazon also 
recommends products to Susan based on Web pages she has visited at Amazon in 
the past. If Susan also registers herself with Amazon—providing full name, e-mail 
address, postal address, and credit card information—Amazon can then include this 
information in its database, thereby associating Susan’s name with her identifica-
tion number (and all of the pages she has visited at the site in the past!). This is how 
Amazon and other e-commerce sites provide “one-click shopping”—when Susan 
chooses to purchase an item during a subsequent visit, she doesn’t need to re-enter 
her name, credit card number, or address.
From this discussion, we see that cookies can be used to identify a user. The first 
time a user visits a site, the user can provide a user identification (possibly his or her 
name). During the subsequent sessions, the browser passes a cookie header to the 
server, thereby identifying the user to the server. Cookies can thus be used to create 
a user session layer on top of stateless HTTP. For example, when a user logs in to 

138         CHAPTER 2    •    APPLICATION LAYER
a Web-based e-mail application (such as Hotmail), the browser sends cookie infor-
mation to the server, permitting the server to identify the user throughout the user’s 
session with the application.
Although cookies often simplify the Internet shopping experience for the user, 
they are controversial because they can also be considered as an invasion of privacy. 
As we just saw, using a combination of cookies and user-supplied account informa-
tion, a Web site can learn a lot about a user and potentially sell this information to a 
third party.
2.2.5 Web Caching
A Web cache—also called a proxy server—is a network entity that satisfies HTTP 
requests on the behalf of an origin Web server. The Web cache has its own disk 
storage and keeps copies of recently requested objects in this storage. As shown in 
Figure 2.11, a user’s browser can be configured so that all of the user’s HTTP requests 
are first directed to the Web cache [RFC 7234]. Once a browser is configured, each 
browser request for an object is first directed to the Web cache. As an example, 
suppose a browser is requesting the object http://www.someschool.edu/
campus.gif. Here is what happens:
	1.	 The browser establishes a TCP connection to the Web cache and sends an HTTP 
request for the object to the Web cache.
	2.	 The Web cache checks to see if it has a copy of the object stored locally. If it 
does, the Web cache returns the object within an HTTP response message to the 
client browser.
	3.	 If the Web cache does not have the object, the Web cache opens a TCP connec-
tion to the origin server, that is, to www.someschool.edu. The Web cache 
HTTP request
HTTP response
HTTP request
HTTP response
HTTP request
HTTP response
HTTP request
HTTP response
Client
Origin
server
Origin
server
Client
Proxy
server
Figure 2.11  ♦  Clients requesting objects through a Web cache



===== SECTION 2.2: 2.2    •    The Web and HTTP         139 =====

then sends an HTTP request for the object into the cache-to-server TCP connec-
tion. After receiving this request, the origin server sends the object within an 
HTTP response to the Web cache.
	4.	 When the Web cache receives the object, it stores a copy in its local storage and 
sends a copy, within an HTTP response message, to the client browser (over the 
existing TCP connection between the client browser and the Web cache).
Note that a cache is both a server and a client at the same time. When it receives 
requests from and sends responses to a browser, it is a server. When it sends requests 
to and receives responses from an origin server, it is a client.
Typically a Web cache is purchased and installed by an ISP. For example, a uni-
versity might install a cache on its campus network and configure all of the campus 
browsers to point to the cache. Or a major residential ISP (such as Comcast) might 
install one or more caches in its network and preconfigure its shipped browsers to 
point to the installed caches.
Web caching has seen deployment in the Internet for two reasons. First, a Web 
cache can substantially reduce the response time for a client request, particularly if 
the bottleneck bandwidth between the client and the origin server is much less than 
the bottleneck bandwidth between the client and the cache. If there is a high-speed 
connection between the client and the cache, as there often is, and if the cache has 
the requested object, then the cache will be able to deliver the object rapidly to the 
client. Second, as we will soon illustrate with an example, Web caches can sub-
stantially reduce traffic on an institution’s access link to the Internet. By reducing 
traffic, the institution (for example, a company or a university) does not have to 
upgrade bandwidth as quickly, thereby reducing costs. Furthermore, Web caches 
can substantially reduce Web traffic in the Internet as a whole, thereby improving 
performance for all applications.
To gain a deeper understanding of the benefits of caches, let’s consider an exam-
ple in the context of Figure 2.12. This figure shows two networks—the institutional 
network and the rest of the public Internet. The institutional network is a high-speed 
LAN. A router in the institutional network and a router in the Internet are connected 
by a 15 Mbps link. The origin servers are attached to the Internet but are located all 
over the globe. Suppose that the average object size is 1 Mbits and that the average 
request rate from the institution’s browsers to the origin servers is 15 requests per 
second. Suppose that the HTTP request messages are negligibly small and thus cre-
ate no traffic in the networks or in the access link (from institutional router to Internet 
router). Also suppose that the amount of time it takes from when the router on the 
Internet side of the access link in Figure 2.12 forwards an HTTP request (within an 
IP datagram) until it receives the response (typically within many IP datagrams) is 
two seconds on average. Informally, we refer to this last delay as the “Internet delay.”
The total response time—that is, the time from the browser’s request of an 
object until its receipt of the object—is the sum of the LAN delay, the access delay 
(that is, the delay between the two routers), and the Internet delay. Let’s now do 

140         CHAPTER 2    •    APPLICATION LAYER
Public Internet
Institutional network
15 Mbps access link
100 Mbps LAN
Origin servers
Figure 2.12  ♦  Bottleneck between an institutional network and the Internet
a very crude calculation to estimate this delay. The traffic intensity on the LAN 
(see Section 1.4.2) is
(15 requests/sec) # (1 Mbits/request)/(100 Mbps) = 0.15
whereas the traffic intensity on the access link (from the Internet router to institution 
router) is
(15 requests/sec) # (1 Mbits/request)/(15 Mbps) = 1
A traffic intensity of 0.15 on a LAN typically results in, at most, tens of millisec-
onds of delay; hence, we can neglect the LAN delay. However, as discussed in 
Section 1.4.2, as the traffic intensity approaches 1 (as is the case of the access link 
in Figure 2.12), the delay on a link becomes very large and grows without bound. 
Thus, the average response time to satisfy requests is going to be on the order of 
minutes, if not more, which is unacceptable for the institution’s users. Clearly 
something must be done.



===== SECTION 2.2: 2.2    •    The Web and HTTP         141 =====

One possible solution is to increase the access rate from 15 Mbps to, say, 100 Mbps. 
This will lower the traffic intensity on the access link to 0.15, which translates to neg-
ligible delays between the two routers. In this case, the total response time will roughly 
be two seconds, that is, the Internet delay. But this solution also means that the institu-
tion must upgrade its access link from 15 Mbps to 100 Mbps, a costly proposition.
Now consider the alternative solution of not upgrading the access link but 
instead installing a Web cache in the institutional network. This solution is illustrated 
in Figure 2.13. Hit rates—the fraction of requests that are satisfied by a cache— 
typically range from 0.2 to 0.7 in practice. For illustrative purposes, let’s suppose 
that the cache provides a hit rate of 0.4 for this institution. Because the clients and 
the cache are connected to the same high-speed LAN, 40 percent of the requests will 
be satisfied almost immediately, say, within 10 milliseconds, by the cache. Neverthe-
less, the remaining 60 percent of the requests still need to be satisfied by the origin 
servers. But with only 60 percent of the requested objects passing through the access 
link, the traffic intensity on the access link is reduced from 1.0 to 0.6. Typically, a 
Public Internet
Institutional network
15 Mbps access link
Institutional
cache
100 Mbps LAN
Origin servers
Figure 2.13  ♦  Adding a cache to the institutional network

142         CHAPTER 2    •    APPLICATION LAYER
traffic intensity less than 0.8 corresponds to a small delay, say, tens of milliseconds, 
on a 15 Mbps link. This delay is negligible compared with the two-second Internet 
delay. Given these considerations, average delay therefore is
0.4 # (0.01 seconds) + 0.6 # (2.01 seconds)
which is just slightly greater than 1.2 seconds. Thus, this second solution provides an 
even lower response time than the first solution, and it doesn’t require the institution 
to upgrade its link to the Internet. The institution does, of course, have to purchase 
and install a Web cache. But this cost is low—many caches use public-domain soft-
ware that runs on inexpensive PCs.
Through the use of Content Distribution Networks (CDNs), Web caches are 
increasingly playing an important role in the Internet. A CDN company installs many 
geographically distributed caches throughout the Internet, thereby localizing much of 
the traffic. There are shared CDNs (such as Akamai and Limelight) and dedicated CDNs 
(such as Google and Netflix). We will discuss CDNs in more detail in Section 2.6.
The Conditional GET
Although caching can reduce user-perceived response times, it introduces a new 
problem—the copy of an object residing in the cache may be stale. In other words, 
the object housed in the Web server may have been modified since the copy was 
cached at the client. Fortunately, HTTP has a mechanism that allows a cache to 
verify that its objects are up to date. This mechanism is called the conditional GET 
[RFC 7232]. An HTTP request message is a so-called conditional GET message if 
(1) the request message uses the GET method and (2) the request message includes an 
If-Modified-Since: header line.
To illustrate how the conditional GET operates, let’s walk through an example. 
First, on the behalf of a requesting browser, a proxy cache sends a request message 
to a Web server:
GET /fruit/kiwi.gif HTTP/1.1
Host: www.exotiquecuisine.com
Second, the Web server sends a response message with the requested object to the 
cache:
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Date: Sat, 3 Oct 2015 15:39:29
Server: Apache/1.3.0 (Unix)
Last-Modified: Wed, 9 Sep 2015 09:23:24
Content-Type: image/gif 
(data data data data data ...)



===== SECTION 2.2: 2.2    •    The Web and HTTP         143 =====

The cache forwards the object to the requesting browser but also caches the object 
locally. Importantly, the cache also stores the last-modified date along with the 
object. Third, one week later, another browser requests the same object via the cache, 
and the object is still in the cache. Since this object may have been modified at the 
Web server in the past week, the cache performs an up-to-date check by issuing a 
conditional GET. Specifically, the cache sends:
GET /fruit/kiwi.gif HTTP/1.1
Host: www.exotiquecuisine.com
If-modified-since: Wed, 9 Sep 2015 09:23:24
Note that the value of the If-modified-since: header line is exactly equal 
to the value of the Last-Modified: header line that was sent by the server one 
week ago. This conditional GET is telling the server to send the object only if the 
object has been modified since the specified date. Suppose the object has not been 
modified since 9 Sep 2015 09:23:24. Then, fourth, the Web server sends a response 
message to the cache:
HTTP/1.1 304 Not Modified
Date: Sat, 10 Oct 2015 15:39:29
Server: Apache/1.3.0 (Unix) 
(empty entity body)
We see that in response to the conditional GET, the Web server still sends a 
response message but does not include the requested object in the response message. 
Including the requested object would only waste bandwidth and increase user- 
perceived response time, particularly if the object is large. Note that this last response 
message has 304 Not Modified in the status line, which tells the cache that it 
can go ahead and forward its (the proxy cache’s) cached copy of the object to the 
requesting browser.
2.2.6 HTTP/2
HTTP/2 [RFC 7540], standardized in 2015, was the first new version of HTTP since 
HTTP/1.1, which was standardized in 1997. Since standardization, HTTP/2 has 
taken off, with over 40% of the top 10 million websites supporting HTTP/2 in 2020 
[W3Techs]. Most browsers—including Google Chrome, Internet Explorer, Safari, 
Opera, and Firefox—also support HTTP/2.
The primary goals for HTTP/2 are to reduce perceived latency by enabling request 
and response multiplexing over a single TCP connection, provide request prioritization 
and server push, and provide efficient compression of HTTP header fields. HTTP/2 
does not change HTTP methods, status codes, URLs, or header fields. Instead, HTTP/2 
changes how the data is formatted and transported between the client and server.

144         CHAPTER 2    •    APPLICATION LAYER
To motivate the need for HTTP/2, recall that HTTP/1.1 uses persistent TCP 
connections, allowing a Web page to be sent from server to client over a single TCP 
connection. By having only one TCP connection per Web page, the number of sock-
ets at the server is reduced and each transported Web page gets a fair share of the 
network bandwidth (as discussed below). But developers of Web browsers quickly 
discovered that sending all the objects in a Web page over a single TCP connec-
tion has a Head of Line (HOL) blocking problem. To understand HOL blocking, 
consider a Web page that includes an HTML base page, a large video clip near the 
top of Web page, and many small objects below the video. Further suppose there is 
a low-to-medium speed bottleneck link (for example, a low-speed wireless link) on 
the path between server and client. Using a single TCP connection, the video clip 
will take a long time to pass through the bottleneck link, while the small objects are 
delayed as they wait behind the video clip; that is, the video clip at the head of the 
line blocks the small objects behind it. HTTP/1.1 browsers typically work around this 
problem by opening multiple parallel TCP connections, thereby having objects in the 
same web page sent in parallel to the browser. This way, the small objects can arrive 
at and be rendered in the browser much faster, thereby reducing user-perceived delay.
TCP congestion control, discussed in detail in Chapter 3, also provides brows-
ers an unintended incentive to use multiple parallel TCP connections rather than a 
single persistent connection. Very roughly speaking, TCP congestion control aims to 
give each TCP connection sharing a bottleneck link an equal share of the available 
bandwidth of that link; so if there are n TCP connections operating over a bottleneck 
link, then each connection approximately gets 1/nth of the bandwidth. By opening 
multiple parallel TCP connections to transport a single Web page, the browser can 
“cheat” and grab a larger portion of the link bandwidth. Many HTTP/1.1 browsers 
open up to six parallel TCP connections not only to circumvent HOL blocking but 
also to obtain more bandwidth.
One of the primary goals of HTTP/2 is to get rid of (or at least reduce the num-
ber of) parallel TCP connections for transporting a single Web page. This not only 
reduces the number of sockets that need to be open and maintained at servers, but 
also allows TCP congestion control to operate as intended. But with only one TCP 
connection to transport a Web page, HTTP/2 requires carefully designed mecha-
nisms to avoid HOL blocking.
HTTP/2 Framing
The HTTP/2 solution for HOL blocking is to break each message into small frames, and 
interleave the request and response messages on the same TCP connection. To under-
stand this, consider again the example of a Web page consisting of one large video clip 
and, say, 8 smaller objects. Thus the server will receive 9 concurrent requests from any 
browser wanting to see this Web page. For each of these requests, the server needs to 
send 9 competing HTTP response messages to the browser. ­Suppose all frames are of 



===== SECTION 2.2: 2.2    •    The Web and HTTP         145 =====

fixed length, the video clip consists of 1000 frames, and each of the smaller objects 
consists of two frames. With frame interleaving, after sending one frame from the 
video clip, the first frames of each of the small objects are sent. Then after sending the 
second frame of the video clip, the last frames of each of the small objects are sent. 
Thus, all of the smaller objects are sent after sending a total of 18 frames. If interleav-
ing were not used, the smaller objects would be sent only after sending 1016 frames. 
Thus the HTTP/2 framing mechanism can significantly decrease user-perceived delay.
The ability to break down an HTTP message into independent frames, inter-
leave them, and then reassemble them on the other end is the single most important 
enhancement of HTTP/2. The framing is done by the framing sub-layer of the 
HTTP/2 protocol. When a server wants to send an HTTP response, the response 
is processed by the framing sub-layer, where it is broken down into frames. The 
header field of the response becomes one frame, and the body of the message is 
broken down into one for more additional frames. The frames of the response are 
then interleaved by the framing sub-layer in the server with the frames of other 
responses and sent over the single persistent TCP connection. As the frames arrive 
at the client, they are first reassembled into the original response messages at the 
framing sub-layer and then processed by the browser as usual. Similarly, a client’s 
HTTP requests are broken into frames and interleaved.
In addition to breaking down each HTTP message into independent frames, the 
framing sublayer also binary encodes the frames. Binary protocols are more efficient 
to parse, lead to slightly smaller frames, and are less error-prone.
Response Message Prioritization and Server Pushing
Message prioritization allows developers to customize the relative priority of 
requests to better optimize application performance. As we just learned, the fram-
ing sub-layer organizes messages into parallel streams of data destined to the same 
requestor. When a client sends concurrent requests to a server, it can prioritize the 
responses it is requesting by assigning a weight between 1 and 256 to each message. 
The higher number indicates higher priority. Using these weights, the server can 
send first the frames for the responses with the highest priority. In addition to this, 
the client also states each message’s dependency on other messages by specifying 
the ID of the message on which it depends.
Another feature of HTTP/2 is the ability for a server to send multiple responses 
for a single client request. That is, in addition to the response to the original request, 
the server can push additional objects to the client, without the client having to 
request each one. This is possible since the HTML base page indicates the objects 
that will be needed to fully render the Web page. So instead of waiting for the 
HTTP requests for these objects, the server can analyze the HTML page, identify 
the objects that are needed, and send them to the client before receiving explicit 
requests for these objects. Server push eliminates the extra latency due to waiting 
for the requests.

146         CHAPTER 2    •    APPLICATION LAYER
HTTP/3
QUIC, discussed in Chapter 3, is a new “transport” protocol that is implemented in 
the application layer over the bare-bones UDP protocol. QUIC has several features 
that are desirable for HTTP, such as message multiplexing (interleaving), per-stream 
flow control, and low-latency connection establishment. HTTP/3 is yet a new HTTP 
protocol that is designed to operate over QUIC. As of 2020, HTTP/3 is described 
in Internet drafts and has not yet been fully standardized. Many of the HTTP/2 fea-
tures (such as message interleaving) are subsumed by QUIC, allowing for a simpler, 
streamlined design for HTTP/3.


===== SECTION 2.3: 2.3	 Electronic Mail in the Internet =====

Electronic mail has been around since the beginning of the Internet. It was the most 
popular application when the Internet was in its infancy [Segaller 1998], and has 
become more elaborate and powerful over the years. It remains one of the Internet’s 
most important and utilized applications.
As with ordinary postal mail, e-mail is an asynchronous communication 
medium—people send and read messages when it is convenient for them, without 
having to coordinate with other people’s schedules. In contrast with postal mail, 
electronic mail is fast, easy to distribute, and inexpensive. Modern e-mail has 
many powerful features, including messages with attachments, hyperlinks, HTML- 
formatted text, and embedded photos.
In this section, we examine the application-layer protocols that are at the heart 
of Internet e-mail. But before we jump into an in-depth discussion of these protocols, 
let’s take a high-level view of the Internet mail system and its key components.
Figure 2.14 presents a high-level view of the Internet mail system. We see from 
this diagram that it has three major components: user agents, mail servers, and the 
Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP). We now describe each of these compo-
nents in the context of a sender, Alice, sending an e-mail message to a recipient, 
Bob. User agents allow users to read, reply to, forward, save, and compose ­messages. 
Examples of user agents for e-mail include Microsoft Outlook, Apple Mail, Web-
based Gmail, the Gmail App running in a smartphone, and so on. When Alice is 
finished composing her message, her user agent sends the message to her mail server, 
where the message is placed in the mail server’s outgoing message queue. When Bob 
wants to read a message, his user agent retrieves the message from his mailbox in his 
mail server.
Mail servers form the core of the e-mail infrastructure. Each recipient, such 
as Bob, has a mailbox located in one of the mail servers. Bob’s mailbox manages 
and maintains the messages that have been sent to him. A typical message starts its 
journey in the sender’s user agent, then travels to the sender’s mail server, and then 



===== SECTION 2.3: 2.3    •    Electronic Mail in the Internet         147 =====

travels to the recipient’s mail server, where it is deposited in the recipient’s mailbox. 
When Bob wants to access the messages in his mailbox, the mail server containing 
his mailbox authenticates Bob (with his username and password). Alice’s mail server 
must also deal with failures in Bob’s mail server. If Alice’s server cannot deliver 
mail to Bob’s server, Alice’s server holds the message in a message queue and 
attempts to transfer the message later. Reattempts are often done every 30 minutes 
or so; if there is no success after several days, the server removes the message and 
notifies the sender (Alice) with an e-mail message.
SMTP is the principal application-layer protocol for Internet electronic mail. It 
uses the reliable data transfer service of TCP to transfer mail from the sender’s mail 
server to the recipient’s mail server. As with most application-layer protocols, SMTP 
has two sides: a client side, which executes on the sender’s mail server, and a server 
side, which executes on the recipient’s mail server. Both the client and server sides of 
Outgoing
message queue 
Key:
User mailbox
SMTP
User agent
User agent
User agent
User agent
User agent
User agent
Mail server
Mail server
Mail server
SMTP
SMTP
Figure 2.14  ♦  A high-level view of the Internet e-mail system

148         CHAPTER 2    •    APPLICATION LAYER
SMTP run on every mail server. When a mail server sends mail to other mail servers, 
it acts as an SMTP client. When a mail server receives mail from other mail servers, 
it acts as an SMTP server.
2.3.1 SMTP
SMTP, defined in RFC 5321, is at the heart of Internet electronic mail. As men-
tioned above, SMTP transfers messages from senders’ mail servers to the recipients’ 
mail servers. SMTP is much older than HTTP. (The original SMTP RFC dates back 
to 1982, and SMTP was around long before that.) Although SMTP has numerous 
wonderful qualities, as evidenced by its ubiquity in the Internet, it is nevertheless 
a legacy technology that possesses certain archaic characteristics. For example, it 
restricts the body (not just the headers) of all mail messages to simple 7-bit ASCII. 
This restriction made sense in the early 1980s when transmission capacity was scarce 
and no one was e-mailing large attachments or large image, audio, or video files. But 
today, in the multimedia era, the 7-bit ASCII restriction is a bit of a pain—it requires 
binary multimedia data to be encoded to ASCII before being sent over SMTP; and it 
requires the corresponding ASCII message to be decoded back to binary after SMTP 
transport. Recall from Section 2.2 that HTTP does not require multimedia data to be 
ASCII encoded before transfer.
To illustrate the basic operation of SMTP, let’s walk through a common sce-
nario. Suppose Alice wants to send Bob a simple ASCII message.
	1.	 Alice invokes her user agent for e-mail, provides Bob’s e-mail address (for 
example, bob@someschool.edu), composes a message, and instructs the 
user agent to send the message.
	2.	 Alice’s user agent sends the message to her mail server, where it is placed in a 
message queue.
	3.	 The client side of SMTP, running on Alice’s mail server, sees the message in the 
message queue. It opens a TCP connection to an SMTP server, running on Bob’s 
mail server.
	4.	 After some initial SMTP handshaking, the SMTP client sends Alice’s message 
into the TCP connection.
	5.	 At Bob’s mail server, the server side of SMTP receives the message. Bob’s mail 
server then places the message in Bob’s mailbox.
	6.	 Bob invokes his user agent to read the message at his convenience.
The scenario is summarized in Figure 2.15.
It is important to observe that SMTP does not normally use intermediate mail serv-
ers for sending mail, even when the two mail servers are located at opposite ends of 
the world. If Alice’s server is in Hong Kong and Bob’s server is in St. Louis, the TCP 
connection is a direct connection between the Hong Kong and St. Louis servers. In 



===== SECTION 2.3: 2.3    •    Electronic Mail in the Internet         149 =====

particular, if Bob’s mail server is down, the message remains in Alice’s mail server and 
waits for a new attempt—the message does not get placed in some intermediate mail 
server.
Let’s now take a closer look at how SMTP transfers a message from a send-
ing mail server to a receiving mail server. We will see that the SMTP proto-
col has many similarities with protocols that are used for face-to-face human 
interaction. First, the client SMTP (running on the sending mail server host) has 
TCP establish a connection to port 25 at the server SMTP (running on the receiv-
ing mail server host). If the server is down, the client tries again later. Once 
this connection is established, the server and client perform some application-
layer handshaking—just as humans often introduce themselves before trans-
ferring information from one to another, SMTP clients and servers introduce 
themselves before transferring information. During this SMTP handshaking phase, 
the SMTP client indicates the e-mail address of the sender (the person who gener-
ated the message) and the e-mail address of the recipient. Once the SMTP client and 
server have introduced themselves to each other, the client sends the message. SMTP 
can count on the reliable data transfer service of TCP to get the message to the server 
without errors. The client then repeats this process over the same TCP connection if 
it has other messages to send to the server; otherwise, it instructs TCP to close the 
connection.
Let’s next take a look at an example transcript of messages exchanged between an 
SMTP client (C) and an SMTP server (S). The hostname of the client is crepes.fr 
and the hostname of the server is hamburger.edu. The ASCII text lines prefaced 
with C: are exactly the lines the client sends into its TCP socket, and the ASCII text 
lines prefaced with S: are exactly the lines the server sends into its TCP socket. The 
following transcript begins as soon as the TCP connection is established.
S:  220 hamburger.edu
C:  HELO crepes.fr
SMTP
Alice’s
mail server
Bob’s
mail server
Alice’s
agent
Bob’s
agent
1
2
4
6
5
Message queue 
Key:
User mailbox
3
Figure 2.15  ♦  Alice sends a message to Bob

150         CHAPTER 2    •    APPLICATION LAYER
S:  250 Hello crepes.fr, pleased to meet you
C:  MAIL FROM: <alice@crepes.fr>
S:  250 alice@crepes.fr ... Sender ok
C:  RCPT TO: <bob@hamburger.edu>
S:  250 bob@hamburger.edu ... Recipient ok
C:  DATA
S:  354 Enter mail, end with ”.” on a line by itself
C:  Do you like ketchup?
C:  How about pickles?
C:  .
S:  250 Message accepted for delivery
C:  QUIT
S:  221 hamburger.edu closing connection
In the example above, the client sends a message (“Do you like ketchup? 
How about pickles?”) from mail server crepes.fr to mail server 
hamburger.edu. As part of the dialogue, the client issued five commands: 
HELO (an abbreviation for HELLO), MAIL FROM, RCPT TO, DATA, and QUIT. 
These commands are self-explanatory. The client also sends a line consisting of a 
single period, which indicates the end of the message to the server. (In ASCII jar-
gon, each message ends with CRLF.CRLF, where CR and LF stand for carriage 
return and line feed, respectively.) The server issues replies to each command, 
with each reply having a reply code and some (optional) English-language expla-
nation. We mention here that SMTP uses persistent connections: If the sending 
mail server has several messages to send to the same receiving mail server, it can 
send all of the messages over the same TCP connection. For each message, the 
client begins the process with a new MAIL FROM: crepes.fr, designates the 
end of message with an isolated period, and issues QUIT only after all messages 
have been sent.
It is highly recommended that you use Telnet to carry out a direct dialogue with 
an SMTP server. To do this, issue
telnet serverName 25
where serverName is the name of a local mail server. When you do this, you are 
simply establishing a TCP connection between your local host and the mail server. 
After typing this line, you should immediately receive the 220 reply from the 
server. Then issue the SMTP commands HELO, MAIL FROM, RCPT TO, DATA, 
CRLF.CRLF, and QUIT at the appropriate times. It is also highly recommended 
that you do Programming Assignment 3 at the end of this chapter. In that assign-
ment, you’ll build a simple user agent that implements the client side of SMTP. It 
will allow you to send an e-mail message to an arbitrary recipient via a local mail 
server.



===== SECTION 2.3: 2.3    •    Electronic Mail in the Internet         151 =====

2.3.2 Mail Message Formats
When Alice writes an ordinary snail-mail letter to Bob, she may include all kinds 
of peripheral header information at the top of the letter, such as Bob’s address, her 
own return address, and the date. Similarly, when an e-mail message is sent from 
one person to another, a header containing peripheral information precedes the 
body of the message itself. This peripheral information is contained in a series of 
header lines, which are defined in RFC 5322. The header lines and the body of the 
message are separated by a blank line (that is, by CRLF). RFC 5322 specifies the 
exact format for mail header lines as well as their semantic interpretations. As with 
HTTP, each header line contains readable text, consisting of a keyword followed 
by a colon followed by a value. Some of the keywords are required and others are 
optional. Every header must have a From: header line and a To: header line; 
a header may include a Subject: header line as well as other optional header 
lines. It is important to note that these header lines are different from the SMTP 
commands we studied in Section 2.3.1 (even though they contain some common 
words such as “from” and “to”). The commands in that section were part of the 
SMTP handshaking protocol; the header lines examined in this section are part of 
the mail message itself.
A typical message header looks like this:
From: alice@crepes.fr
To: bob@hamburger.edu
Subject: Searching for the meaning of life.
After the message header, a blank line follows; then the message body (in ASCII) 
follows. You should use Telnet to send a message to a mail server that contains 
some header lines, including the Subject: header line. To do this, issue telnet 
serverName 25, as discussed in Section 2.3.1.
2.3.3 Mail Access Protocols
Once SMTP delivers the message from Alice’s mail server to Bob’s mail server, the 
message is placed in Bob’s mailbox. Given that Bob (the recipient) executes his user 
agent on his local host (e.g., smartphone or PC), it is natural to consider placing a mail 
server on his local host as well. With this approach, Alice’s mail server would dia-
logue directly with Bob’s PC. There is a problem with this approach, however. Recall 
that a mail server manages mailboxes and runs the client and server sides of SMTP. 
If Bob’s mail server were to reside on his local host, then Bob’s host would have to 
remain always on, and connected to the Internet, in order to receive new mail, which 
can arrive at any time. This is impractical for many Internet users. Instead, a typical 
user runs a user agent on the local host but accesses its mailbox stored on an always-
on shared mail server. This mail server is shared with other users.

152         CHAPTER 2    •    APPLICATION LAYER
Now let’s consider the path an e-mail message takes when it is sent from Alice 
to Bob. We just learned that at some point along the path the e-mail message needs to 
be deposited in Bob’s mail server. This could be done simply by having Alice’s user 
agent send the message directly to Bob’s mail server. However, typically the send-
er’s user agent does not dialogue directly with the recipient’s mail server. Instead, as 
shown in Figure 2.16, Alice’s user agent uses SMTP or HTTP to deliver the e-mail 
message into her mail server, then Alice’s mail server uses SMTP (as an SMTP cli-
ent) to relay the e-mail message to Bob’s mail server. Why the two-step procedure? 
Primarily because without relaying through Alice’s mail server, Alice’s user agent 
doesn’t have any recourse to an unreachable destination mail server. By having Alice 
first deposit the e-mail in her own mail server, Alice’s mail server can repeatedly try 
to send the message to Bob’s mail server, say every 30 minutes, until Bob’s mail 
server becomes operational. (And if Alice’s mail server is down, then she has the 
recourse of complaining to her system administrator!) 
But there is still one missing piece to the puzzle! How does a recipient like Bob, 
running a user agent on his local host , obtain his messages, which are sitting in a mail 
server? Note that Bob’s user agent can’t use SMTP to obtain the messages because 
obtaining the messages is a pull operation, whereas SMTP is a push protocol. 
Today, there are two common ways for Bob to retrieve his e-mail from a mail 
server. If Bob is using Web-based e-mail or a smartphone app (such as Gmail), then 
the user agent will use HTTP to retrieve Bob’s e-mail. This case requires Bob’s mail 
server to have an HTTP interface as well as an SMTP interface (to communicate with 
Alice’s mail server). The alternative method, typically used with mail clients such 
as Microsoft Outlook, is to use the Internet Mail Access Protocol (IMAP) defined 
in RFC 3501. Both the HTTP and IMAP approaches allow Bob to manage folders, 
maintained in Bob’s mail server. Bob can move messages into the folders he creates, 
delete messages, mark messages as important, and so on.


===== SECTION 2.4: 2.4	 DNS—The Internet’s Directory Service =====

We human beings can be identified in many ways. For example, we can be iden-
tified by the names that appear on our birth certificates. We can be identified by 
our social security numbers. We can be identified by our driver’s license numbers. 
SMTP
Alice’s
mail server
Bob’s
mail server
Alice’s
agent
Bob’s
agent
SMTP
or
HTTP
HTTP
or
IMAP
Figure 2.16  ♦  E-mail protocols and their communicating entities



===== SECTION 2.4: 2.4    •    DNS—The Internet’s Directory Service         153 =====

Although each can be used to identify people, within a given context one identifier 
may be more appropriate than another. For example, the computers at the IRS (the 
infamous tax-collecting agency in the United States) prefer to use fixed-length social 
security numbers rather than birth certificate names. On the other hand, ordinary 
people ­prefer the more mnemonic birth certificate names rather than social security 
numbers. (Indeed, can you imagine saying, “Hi. My name is 132-67-9875. Please 
meet my husband, 178-87-1146.”)
Just as humans can be identified in many ways, so too can Internet hosts. One 
identifier for a host is its hostname. Hostnames—such as www.facebook.com, 
www.google.com, gaia.cs.umass.edu—are mnemonic and are therefore 
appreciated by humans. However, hostnames provide little, if any, information about 
the location within the Internet of the host. (A hostname such as www.eurecom.
fr, which ends with the country code .fr, tells us that the host is probably in 
France, but doesn’t say much more.) Furthermore, because hostnames can consist of 
variable-length alphanumeric characters, they would be difficult to process by rout-
ers. For these reasons, hosts are also identified by so-called IP addresses.
We discuss IP addresses in some detail in Chapter 4, but it is useful to say a 
few brief words about them now. An IP address consists of four bytes and has a 
rigid hierarchical structure. An IP address looks like 121.7.106.83, where each 
period separates one of the bytes expressed in decimal notation from 0 to 255. An IP 
address is hierarchical because as we scan the address from left to right, we obtain 
more and more specific information about where the host is located in the Internet 
(that is, within which network, in the network of networks). Similarly, when we scan 
a postal address from bottom to top, we obtain more and more specific information 
about where the addressee is located.
2.4.1 Services Provided by DNS
We have just seen that there are two ways to identify a host—by a hostname and 
by an IP address. People prefer the more mnemonic hostname identifier, while 
routers prefer fixed-length, hierarchically structured IP addresses. In order to rec-
oncile these preferences, we need a directory service that translates hostnames to 
IP addresses. This is the main task of the Internet’s domain name system (DNS). 
The DNS is (1) a distributed database implemented in a hierarchy of DNS servers, 
and (2) an application-layer protocol that allows hosts to query the distributed 
database. The DNS servers are often UNIX machines running the Berkeley Inter-
net Name Domain (BIND) software [BIND 2020]. The DNS protocol runs over 
UDP and uses port 53.
DNS is commonly employed by other application-layer protocols, including 
HTTP and SMTP, to translate user-supplied hostnames to IP addresses. As an exam-
ple, consider what happens when a browser (that is, an HTTP client), running on 
some user’s host, requests the URL www.someschool.edu/index.html. In 
order for the user’s host to be able to send an HTTP request message to the Web 

154         CHAPTER 2    •    APPLICATION LAYER
server www.someschool.edu, the user’s host must first obtain the IP address of 
www.someschool.edu. This is done as follows.
	1.	 The same user machine runs the client side of the DNS application.
	2.	 The browser extracts the hostname, www.someschool.edu, from the URL 
and passes the hostname to the client side of the DNS application.
	3.	 The DNS client sends a query containing the hostname to a DNS server.
	4.	 The DNS client eventually receives a reply, which includes the IP address for 
the hostname.
	5.	 Once the browser receives the IP address from DNS, it can initiate a TCP con-
nection to the HTTP server process located at port 80 at that IP address.
We see from this example that DNS adds an additional delay—sometimes 
substantial—to the Internet applications that use it. Fortunately, as we discuss below, 
the desired IP address is often cached in a “nearby” DNS server, which helps to 
reduce DNS network traffic as well as the average DNS delay.
DNS provides a few other important services in addition to translating host-
names to IP addresses:
•	 Host aliasing. A host with a complicated hostname can have one or more 
alias names. For example, a hostname such as relay1.west-coast 
.enterprise.com could have, say, two aliases such as enterprise.com  
and www.enterprise.com. In this case, the hostname relay1 
.west-coast.enterprise.com is said to be a canonical hostname. Alias 
hostnames, when present, are typically more mnemonic than canonical host-
names. DNS can be invoked by an application to obtain the canonical hostname 
for a supplied alias hostname as well as the IP address of the host.
•	 Mail server aliasing. For obvious reasons, it is highly desirable that e-mail 
addresses be mnemonic. For example, if Bob has an account with Yahoo Mail, 
Bob’s e-mail address might be as simple as bob@yahoo.com. However, the 
hostname of the Yahoo mail server is more complicated and much less mnemonic 
than simply yahoo.com (for example, the canonical hostname might be some-
thing like relay1.west-coast.yahoo.com). DNS can be invoked by a 
mail application to obtain the canonical hostname for a supplied alias hostname 
as well as the IP address of the host. In fact, the MX record (see below) permits a 
company’s mail server and Web server to have identical (aliased) hostnames; for 
example, a company’s Web server and mail server can both be called enter-
prise.com.
•	 Load distribution. DNS is also used to perform load distribution among repli-
cated servers, such as replicated Web servers. Busy sites, such as cnn.com, are 
replicated over multiple servers, with each server running on a different end sys-
tem and each having a different IP address. For replicated Web servers, a set of IP 



===== SECTION 2.4: 2.4    •    DNS—The Internet’s Directory Service         155 =====

addresses is thus associated with one alias hostname. The DNS database contains 
this set of IP addresses. When clients make a DNS query for a name mapped to a 
set of addresses, the server responds with the entire set of IP addresses, but rotates 
the ordering of the addresses within each reply. Because a client typically sends 
its HTTP request message to the IP address that is listed first in the set, DNS rota-
tion distributes the traffic among the replicated servers. DNS rotation is also used 
for e-mail so that multiple mail servers can have the same alias name. Also, con-
tent distribution companies such as Akamai have used DNS in more sophisticated 
ways [Dilley 2002] to provide Web content distribution (see Section 2.6.3).
The DNS is specified in RFC 1034 and RFC 1035, and updated in several addi-
tional RFCs. It is a complex system, and we only touch upon key aspects of its 
operation here. The interested reader is referred to these RFCs and the book by Albitz 
and Liu [Albitz 1993]; see also the retrospective paper [Mockapetris 1988], which 
provides a nice description of the what and why of DNS, and [Mockapetris 2005].
2.4.2 Overview of How DNS Works
We now present a high-level overview of how DNS works. Our discussion will focus 
on the hostname-to-IP-address translation service.
Suppose that some application (such as a Web browser or a mail client) running 
in a user’s host needs to translate a hostname to an IP address. The application will 
invoke the client side of DNS, specifying the hostname that needs to be translated. 
(On many UNIX-based machines, gethostbyname() is the function call that 
an application calls in order to perform the translation.) DNS in the user’s host then 
DNS: CRITICAL NETWORK FUNCTIONS VIA THE CLIENT-SERVER PARADIGM
Like HTTP, FTP, and SMTP, the DNS protocol is an application-layer protocol since it 
(1) runs between communicating end systems using the client-server paradigm and 
(2) relies on an underlying end-to-end transport protocol to transfer DNS messages between 
communicating end systems. In another sense, however, the role of the DNS is quite differ-
ent from Web, file transfer, and e-mail applications. Unlike these applications, the DNS is 
not an application with which a user directly interacts. Instead, the DNS provides a core 
Internet function—namely, translating hostnames to their underlying IP addresses, for user 
applications and other software in the Internet. We noted in Section 1.2 that much of the 
complexity in the Internet architecture is located at the “edges” of the network. The DNS, 
which implements the critical name-to-address translation process using clients and servers 
located at the edge of the network, is yet another example of that design philosophy.
PRINCIPLES IN PRACTICE

156         CHAPTER 2    •    APPLICATION LAYER
takes over, sending a query message into the network. All DNS query and reply mes-
sages are sent within UDP datagrams to port 53. After a delay, ranging from millisec-
onds to seconds, DNS in the user’s host receives a DNS reply message that provides 
the desired mapping. This mapping is then passed to the invoking application. Thus, 
from the perspective of the invoking application in the user’s host, DNS is a black 
box providing a simple, straightforward translation service. But in fact, the black box 
that implements the service is complex, consisting of a large number of DNS servers 
distributed around the globe, as well as an application-layer protocol that specifies 
how the DNS servers and querying hosts communicate.
A simple design for DNS would have one DNS server that contains all the map-
pings. In this centralized design, clients simply direct all queries to the single DNS 
server, and the DNS server responds directly to the querying clients. Although the 
simplicity of this design is attractive, it is inappropriate for today’s Internet, with its 
vast (and growing) number of hosts. The problems with a centralized design include:
•	 A single point of failure. If the DNS server crashes, so does the entire Internet!
•	 Traffic volume. A single DNS server would have to handle all DNS queries (for 
all the HTTP requests and e-mail messages generated from hundreds of millions 
of hosts).
•	 Distant centralized database. A single DNS server cannot be “close to” all the 
querying clients. If we put the single DNS server in New York City, then all que-
ries from Australia must travel to the other side of the globe, perhaps over slow 
and congested links. This can lead to significant delays.
•	 Maintenance. The single DNS server would have to keep records for all Internet 
hosts. Not only would this centralized database be huge, but it would have to be 
updated frequently to account for every new host.
In summary, a centralized database in a single DNS server simply doesn’t scale. 
Consequently, the DNS is distributed by design. In fact, the DNS is a wonderful 
example of how a distributed database can be implemented in the Internet.
A Distributed, Hierarchical Database
In order to deal with the issue of scale, the DNS uses a large number of servers, 
organized in a hierarchical fashion and distributed around the world. No single DNS 
server has all of the mappings for all of the hosts in the Internet. Instead, the map-
pings are distributed across the DNS servers. To a first approximation, there are three 
classes of DNS servers—root DNS servers, top-level domain (TLD) DNS servers, 
and authoritative DNS servers—organized in a hierarchy as shown in Figure 2.17. 
To understand how these three classes of servers interact, suppose a DNS client 
wants to determine the IP address for the hostname www.amazon.com. To a first 
approximation, the following events will take place. The client first contacts one of 



===== SECTION 2.4: 2.4    •    DNS—The Internet’s Directory Service         157 =====

the root servers, which returns IP addresses for TLD servers for the top-level domain 
com. The client then contacts one of these TLD servers, which returns the IP address 
of an authoritative server for amazon.com. Finally, the client contacts one of the 
authoritative servers for amazon.com, which returns the IP address for the host-
name www.amazon.com. We’ll soon examine this DNS lookup process in more 
detail. But let’s first take a closer look at these three classes of DNS servers:
•	 Root DNS servers. There are more than 1000 root servers instances scattered all 
over the world, as shown in Figure 2.18. These root servers are copies of 13 dif-
ferent root servers, managed by 12 different organizations, and coordinated 
through the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority [IANA 2020]. The full list 
of root name servers, along with the organizations that manage them and their 
IP addresses can be found at [Root Servers 2020]. Root name servers provide 
the IP addresses of the TLD servers.
•	 Top-level domain (TLD) servers. For each of the top-level domains—top-level 
domains such as com, org, net, edu, and gov, and all of the country top-level 
domains such as uk, fr, ca, and jp—there is TLD server (or server cluster). The 
company Verisign Global Registry Services maintains the TLD servers for the 
com top-level domain, and the company Educause maintains the TLD servers for 
the edu top-level domain. The network infrastructure supporting a TLD can be 
large and complex; see [Osterweil 2012] for a nice overview of the Verisign net-
work. See [TLD list 2020] for a list of all top-level domains. TLD servers provide 
the IP addresses for authoritative DNS servers.
•	 Authoritative DNS servers. Every organization with publicly accessible hosts 
(such as Web servers and mail servers) on the Internet must provide publicly 
accessible DNS records that map the names of those hosts to IP addresses. An 
organization’s authoritative DNS server houses these DNS records. An organi-
zation can choose to implement its own authoritative DNS server to hold these 
records; alternatively, the organization can pay to have these records stored in an 
edu DNS servers
org DNS servers
com DNS servers
nyu.edu
DNS servers
facebook.com
DNS servers
amazon.com
DNS servers
pbs.org
DNS servers
umass.edu
DNS servers
Root DNS servers
Figure 2.17  ♦  Portion of the hierarchy of DNS servers

158         CHAPTER 2    •    APPLICATION LAYER
authoritative DNS server of some service provider. Most universities and large 
companies implement and maintain their own primary and secondary (backup) 
authoritative DNS server.
The root, TLD, and authoritative DNS servers all belong to the hierarchy of 
DNS servers, as shown in Figure 2.17. There is another important type of DNS 
server called the local DNS server. A local DNS server does not strictly belong to 
the hierarchy of servers but is nevertheless central to the DNS architecture. Each 
ISP—such as a residential ISP or an institutional ISP—has a local DNS server (also 
called a default name server). When a host connects to an ISP, the ISP provides 
the host with the IP addresses of one or more of its local DNS servers (typically 
through DHCP, which is discussed in Chapter 4). You can easily determine the IP 
address of your local DNS server by accessing network status windows in Win-
dows or UNIX. A host’s local DNS server is typically “close to” the host. For an 
institutional ISP, the local DNS server may be on the same LAN as the host; for a 
residential ISP, it is typically separated from the host by no more than a few rout-
ers. When a host makes a DNS query, the query is sent to the local DNS server, 
which acts a proxy, ­forwarding the query into the DNS server hierarchy, as we’ll 
discuss in more detail below.
Let’s take a look at a simple example. Suppose the host cse.nyu.edu desires 
the IP address of gaia.cs.umass.edu. Also suppose that NYU’s local DNS 
server for cse.nyu.edu is called dns.nyu.edu and that an authoritative DNS 
server for gaia.cs.umass.edu is called dns.umass.edu. As shown in 
0 Servers
1–10 Servers
11–20 Servers
21+ Servers
Key:
Figure 2.18  ♦  DNS root servers in 2020



===== SECTION 2.4: 2.4    •    DNS—The Internet’s Directory Service         159 =====

­Figure 2.19, the host cse.nyu.edu first sends a DNS query message to its local 
DNS server, dns.nyu.edu. The query message contains the hostname to be trans-
lated, namely, gaia.cs.umass.edu. The local DNS server forwards the query 
message to a root DNS server. The root DNS server takes note of the edu suffix and 
returns to the local DNS server a list of IP addresses for TLD servers responsible 
for edu. The local DNS server then resends the query message to one of these TLD 
servers. The TLD server takes note of the umass.edu suffix and responds with 
the IP address of the authoritative DNS server for the University of Massachusetts, 
namely, dns.umass.edu. Finally, the local DNS server resends the query mes-
sage directly to dns.umass.edu, which responds with the IP address of gaia 
.cs.umass.edu. Note that in this example, in order to obtain the mapping for one 
hostname, eight DNS messages were sent: four query messages and four reply mes-
sages! We’ll soon see how DNS caching reduces this query traffic.
Our previous example assumed that the TLD server knows the authoritative DNS 
server for the hostname. In general, this is not always true. Instead, the TLD server 
Requesting host
cse.nyu.edu
Local DNS server
TLD DNS server
dns.nyu.edu
Root DNS server
1
8
2
7
4
5
3
6
Authoritative DNS server
dns.umass.edu
gaia.cs.umass.edu
Figure 2.19  ♦  Interaction of the various DNS servers

160         CHAPTER 2    •    APPLICATION LAYER
may know only of an intermediate DNS server, which in turn knows the authorita-
tive DNS server for the hostname. For example, suppose again that the University of 
Massachusetts has a DNS server for the university, called dns.umass.edu. Also 
suppose that each of the departments at the University of Massachusetts has its own 
DNS server, and that each departmental DNS server is authoritative for all hosts in 
the department. In this case, when the intermediate DNS server, dns.umass.edu, 
receives a query for a host with a hostname ending with cs.umass.edu, it returns 
to dns.nyu.edu the IP address of dns.cs.umass.edu, which is authoritative 
for all hostnames ending with cs.umass.edu. The local DNS server dns.nyu 
.edu then sends the query to the authoritative DNS server, which returns the desired 
mapping to the local DNS server, which in turn returns the mapping to the requesting 
host. In this case, a total of 10 DNS messages are sent!
The example shown in Figure 2.19 makes use of both recursive queries and 
iterative queries. The query sent from cse.nyu.edu to dns.nyu.edu is a 
recursive query, since the query asks dns.nyu.edu to obtain the mapping on its 
behalf. However, the subsequent three queries are iterative since all of the replies 
are directly returned to dns.nyu.edu. In theory, any DNS query can be itera-
tive or recursive. For example, Figure 2.20 shows a DNS query chain for which all 
of the queries are recursive. In practice, the queries typically follow the pattern in 
Figure 2.19: The query from the requesting host to the local DNS server is recursive, 
and the remaining queries are iterative.
DNS Caching
Our discussion thus far has ignored DNS caching, a critically important feature 
of the DNS system. In truth, DNS extensively exploits DNS caching in order to 
improve the delay performance and to reduce the number of DNS messages 
ricocheting around the Internet. The idea behind DNS caching is very simple. In a 
query chain, when a DNS server receives a DNS reply (containing, for example, a 
mapping from a hostname to an IP address), it can cache the mapping in its local 
memory. For example, in Figure 2.19, each time the local DNS server dns.nyu.edu 
receives a reply from some DNS server, it can cache any of the information contained 
in the reply. If a hostname/IP address pair is cached in a DNS server and another 
query arrives to the DNS server for the same hostname, the DNS server can provide 
the desired IP address, even if it is not authoritative for the hostname. Because hosts 
and mappings between hostnames and IP addresses are by no means permanent, 
DNS servers discard cached information after a period of time (often set to two days).
As an example, suppose that a host apricot.nyu.edu queries dns.nyu.edu 
for the IP address for the hostname cnn.com. Furthermore, ­suppose that a few hours 
later, another NYU host, say, kiwi.nyu.edu, also queries dns.nyu.edu  
with the same hostname. Because of caching, the local DNS server will be able 
to immediately return the IP address of cnn.com to this second requesting 
host without having to query any other DNS servers. A local DNS server can 



===== SECTION 2.4: 2.4    •    DNS—The Internet’s Directory Service         161 =====

Requesting host
cse.nyu.edu
Local DNS server
TLD DNS server
dns.nyu.edu
Root DNS server
1
8
5
4
2
7
Authoritative DNS server
dns.umass.edu
gaia.cs.umass.edu
6
3
Figure 2.20  ♦  Recursive queries in DNS
also cache the IP addresses of TLD servers, thereby allowing the local DNS server 
to bypass the root DNS servers in a query chain. In fact, because of caching, root 
servers are bypassed for all but a very small fraction of DNS queries.
2.4.3 DNS Records and Messages
The DNS servers that together implement the DNS distributed database store 
resource records (RRs), including RRs that provide hostname-to-IP address map-
pings. Each DNS reply message carries one or more resource records. In this and 
the following subsection, we provide a brief overview of DNS resource records and 
messages; more details can be found in [Albitz 1993] or in the DNS RFCs [RFC 
1034; RFC 1035].

162         CHAPTER 2    •    APPLICATION LAYER
A resource record is a four-tuple that contains the following fields:
(Name, Value, Type, TTL)
TTL is the time to live of the resource record; it determines when a resource should 
be removed from a cache. In the example records given below, we ignore the TTL 
field. The meaning of Name and Value depend on Type:
•	 If Type=A, then Name is a hostname and Value is the IP address for the host-
name. Thus, a Type A record provides the standard hostname-to-IP address map-
ping. As an example, (relay1.bar.foo.com, 145.37.93.126, A) is 
a Type A record.
•	 If Type=NS, then Name is a domain (such as foo.com) and Value is the host-
name of an authoritative DNS server that knows how to obtain the IP addresses 
for hosts in the domain. This record is used to route DNS queries further along in 
the query chain. As an example, (foo.com, dns.foo.com, NS) is a Type 
NS record.
•	 If Type=CNAME, then Value is a canonical hostname for the alias hostname 
Name. This record can provide querying hosts the canonical name for a host-
name. As an example, (foo.com, relay1.bar.foo.com, CNAME) is a 
CNAME record.
•	 If Type=MX, then Value is the canonical name of a mail server that has an alias 
hostname Name. As an example, (foo.com, mail.bar.foo.com, MX) 
is an MX record. MX records allow the hostnames of mail servers to have simple 
aliases. Note that by using the MX record, a company can have the same aliased 
name for its mail server and for one of its other servers (such as its Web server). 
To obtain the canonical name for the mail server, a DNS client would query for 
an MX record; to obtain the canonical name for the other server, the DNS client 
would query for the CNAME record.
If a DNS server is authoritative for a particular hostname, then the DNS server 
will contain a Type A record for the hostname. (Even if the DNS server is not author-
itative, it may contain a Type A record in its cache.) If a server is not authoritative 
for a hostname, then the server will contain a Type NS record for the domain that 
includes the hostname; it will also contain a Type A record that provides the IP address 
of the DNS server in the Value field of the NS record. As an example, suppose an 
edu TLD server is not authoritative for the host gaia.cs.umass.edu. Then this 
server will contain a record for a domain that includes the host gaia.cs.umass 
.edu, for example, (umass.edu, dns.umass.edu, NS). The edu 
TLD server would also contain a Type A record, which maps the DNS server 
dns.umass.edu to an IP address, for example, (dns.umass.edu, 
128.119.40.111, A).



===== SECTION 2.4: 2.4    •    DNS—The Internet’s Directory Service         163 =====

DNS Messages
Earlier in this section, we referred to DNS query and reply messages. These are the 
only two kinds of DNS messages. Furthermore, both query and reply messages have 
the same format, as shown in Figure 2.21.The semantics of the various fields in a 
DNS message are as follows:
•	 The first 12 bytes is the header section, which has a number of fields. The first 
field is a 16-bit number that identifies the query. This identifier is copied into the 
reply message to a query, allowing the client to match received replies with sent 
queries. There are a number of flags in the flag field. A 1-bit query/reply flag indi-
cates whether the message is a query (0) or a reply (1). A 1-bit authoritative flag is 
set in a reply message when a DNS server is an authoritative server for a queried 
name. A 1-bit recursion-desired flag is set when a client (host or DNS server) 
desires that the DNS server perform recursion when it doesn’t have the record. A 
1-bit recursion-available field is set in a reply if the DNS server supports recur-
sion. In the header, there are also four number-of fields. These fields indicate the 
number of occurrences of the four types of data sections that follow the header.
•	 The question section contains information about the query that is being made. 
This section includes (1) a name field that contains the name that is being que-
ried, and (2) a type field that indicates the type of question being asked about the 
name—for example, a host address associated with a name (Type A) or the mail 
server for a name (Type MX).
Identiﬁcation
Number of questions
Number of authority RRs
Name, type ﬁelds for
a query
12 bytes
RRs in response to query
Records for
authoritative servers
Additional “helpful”
info that may be used
Flags
Number of answer RRs
Number of additional RRs
Authority
(variable number of resource records)
Additional information
(variable number of resource records)
Answers
(variable number of resource records)
Questions
(variable number of questions)
Figure 2.21  ♦  DNS message format

164         CHAPTER 2    •    APPLICATION LAYER
•	 In a reply from a DNS server, the answer section contains the resource records for 
the name that was originally queried. Recall that in each resource record there is the 
Type (for example, A, NS, CNAME, and MX), the Value, and the TTL. A reply can 
return multiple RRs in the answer, since a hostname can have multiple IP addresses 
(for example, for replicated Web servers, as discussed earlier in this section).
•	 The authority section contains records of other authoritative servers.
•	 The additional section contains other helpful records. For example, the answer 
field in a reply to an MX query contains a resource record providing the canoni-
cal hostname of a mail server. The additional section contains a Type A record 
providing the IP address for the canonical hostname of the mail server.
How would you like to send a DNS query message directly from the host you’re 
working on to some DNS server? This can easily be done with the nslookup program, 
which is available from most Windows and UNIX platforms. For example, from a Win-
dows host, open the Command Prompt and invoke the nslookup program by simply typ-
ing “nslookup.” After invoking nslookup, you can send a DNS query to any DNS server 
(root, TLD, or authoritative). After receiving the reply message from the DNS server, 
nslookup will display the records included in the reply (in a human-readable format). As 
an alternative to running nslookup from your own host, you can visit one of many Web 
sites that allow you to remotely employ nslookup. (Just type “nslookup” into a search 
engine and you’ll be brought to one of these sites.) The DNS Wireshark lab at the end of 
this chapter will allow you to explore the DNS in much more detail.
Inserting Records into the DNS Database
The discussion above focused on how records are retrieved from the DNS database. 
You might be wondering how records get into the database in the first place. Let’s look 
at how this is done in the context of a specific example. Suppose you have just created 
an exciting new startup company called Network Utopia. The first thing you’ll surely 
want to do is register the domain name networkutopia.com at a registrar. A reg-
istrar is a commercial entity that verifies the uniqueness of the domain name, enters 
the domain name into the DNS database (as discussed below), and collects a small fee 
from you for its services. Prior to 1999, a single registrar, Network Solutions, had a 
monopoly on domain name registration for com, net, and org domains. But now 
there are many registrars competing for customers, and the Internet Corporation for 
Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) accredits the various registrars. A complete 
list of accredited registrars is available at http://www.internic.net.
When you register the domain name networkutopia.com with some reg-
istrar, you also need to provide the registrar with the names and IP addresses of 
your primary and secondary authoritative DNS servers. Suppose the names and IP 
addresses are dns1.networkutopia.com, dns2.networkutopia.com, 
212.2.212.1, and 212.212.212.2. For each of these two authoritative DNS 



===== SECTION 2.4: 2.4    •    DNS—The Internet’s Directory Service         165 =====

DNS VULNERABILITIES
We have seen that DNS is a critical component of the Internet infrastructure, with 
many important services—including the Web and e-mail—simply incapable of func-
tioning without it. We therefore naturally ask, how can DNS be attacked? Is DNS a 
sitting duck, waiting to be knocked out of service, while taking most Internet applica-
tions down with it?
The first type of attack that comes to mind is a DDoS bandwidth-flooding attack 
(see Section 1.6) against DNS servers. For example, an attacker could attempt to 
send to each DNS root server a deluge of packets, so many that the majority of 
legitimate DNS queries never get answered. Such a large-scale DDoS attack against 
DNS root servers actually took place on October 21, 2002. In this attack, the attack-
ers leveraged a botnet to send truck loads of ICMP ping messages to each of the 
13 DNS root IP addresses. (ICMP messages are discussed in Section 5.6. For now, 
it suffices to know that ICMP packets are special types of IP datagrams.) Fortunately, 
this large-scale attack caused minimal damage, having little or no impact on users’ 
Internet experience. The attackers did succeed at directing a deluge of packets at the 
root servers. But many of the DNS root servers were protected by packet filters, con-
figured to always block all ICMP ping messages directed at the root servers. These 
protected servers were thus spared and functioned as normal. Furthermore, most local 
DNS servers cache the IP addresses of top-level-domain servers, allowing the query 
process to often bypass the DNS root servers.
A potentially more effective DDoS attack against DNS is send a deluge of DNS 
queries to top-level-domain servers, for example, to top-level-domain servers that 
handle the .com domain. It is harder to filter DNS queries directed to DNS servers; 
and top-level-domain servers are not as easily bypassed as are root servers. Such an 
attack took place against the top-level-domain service provider Dyn on October 21, 
2016. This DDoS attack was accomplished through a large number of DNS lookup 
requests from a botnet consisting of about one hundred thousand IoT devices such as 
printers, IP cameras, residential gateways and baby monitors that had been infected 
with Mirai malware. For almost a full day, Amazon, Twitter, Netflix, Github and 
Spotify were disturbed.
DNS could potentially be attacked in other ways. In a man-in-the-middle attack, 
the attacker intercepts queries from hosts and returns bogus replies. In the DNS poi-
soning attack, the attacker sends bogus replies to a DNS server, tricking the server 
into accepting bogus records into its cache. Either of these attacks could be used, 
for example, to redirect an unsuspecting Web user to the attacker’s Web site. The 
DNS Security Extensions (DNSSEC [Gieben 2004; RFC 4033] have been designed 
and deployed to protect against such exploits. DNSSEC, a secured version of DNS, 
addresses many of these possible attacks and is gaining popularity in the Internet.
FOCUS ON SECURITY

166         CHAPTER 2    •    APPLICATION LAYER
servers, the registrar would then make sure that a Type NS and a Type A record are 
entered into the TLD com servers. Specifically, for the primary authoritative server 
for networkutopia.com, the registrar would insert the following two resource 
records into the DNS system:
(networkutopia.com, dns1.networkutopia.com, NS)
(dns1.networkutopia.com, 212.212.212.1, A)
You’ll also have to make sure that the Type A resource record for your Web server 
www.networkutopia.com and the Type MX resource record for your mail 
server mail.networkutopia.com are entered into your authoritative DNS 
servers. (Until recently, the contents of each DNS server were configured statically, 
for example, from a configuration file created by a system manager. More recently, 
an UPDATE option has been added to the DNS protocol to allow data to be dynami-
cally added or deleted from the database via DNS messages. [RFC 2136] and [RFC 
3007] specify DNS dynamic updates.)
Once all of these steps are completed, people will be able to visit your Web site 
and send e-mail to the employees at your company. Let’s conclude our discussion of 
DNS by verifying that this statement is true. This verification also helps to solidify 
what we have learned about DNS. Suppose Alice in Australia wants to view the Web 
page www.networkutopia.com. As discussed earlier, her host will first send a 
DNS query to her local DNS server. The local DNS server will then contact a TLD 
com server. (The local DNS server will also have to contact a root DNS server if the 
address of a TLD com server is not cached.) This TLD server contains the Type NS 
and Type A resource records listed above, because the registrar had these resource 
records inserted into all of the TLD com servers. The TLD com server sends a reply 
to Alice’s local DNS server, with the reply containing the two resource records. The 
local DNS server then sends a DNS query to 212.212.212.1, asking for the Type 
A record corresponding to www.networkutopia.com. This record provides the 
IP address of the desired Web server, say, 212.212.71.4, which the local DNS 
server passes back to Alice’s host. Alice’s browser can now initiate a TCP connec-
tion to the host 212.212.71.4 and send an HTTP request over the connection. 
Whew! There’s a lot more going on than what meets the eye when one surfs the Web!


===== SECTION 2.4: 2.4 requires both no data loss and timing. Can you conceive of an application =====

that requires no data loss and that is also highly time-sensitive?
	R8.	 List the four broad classes of services that a transport protocol can provide. 
For each of the service classes, indicate if either UDP or TCP (or both) pro-
vides such a service.
	R9.	 Recall that TCP can be enhanced with TLS to provide process-to-process 
security services, including encryption. Does TLS operate at the transport 
layer or the application layer? If the application developer wants TCP to be 
enhanced with TLS, what does the developer have to do?
SECTIONS 2.2–2.5
	R10.	 What is meant by a handshaking protocol?
	R11.	 What does a stateless protocol mean? Is IMAP stateless? What about SMTP?
	R12.	 How can websites keep track of users? Do they always need to use cookies?
	R13.	 Describe how Web caching can reduce the delay in receiving a requested 
object. Will Web caching reduce the delay for all objects requested by a user 
or for only some of the objects? Why?
	R14.	 Telnet into a Web server and send a multiline request message. Include in 
the request message the If-modified-since: header line to force a 
response message with the 304 Not Modified status code.
	R15.	 Are there any constraints on the format of the HTTP body? What about the 
email message body sent with SMTP? How can arbitrary data be transmitted 
over SMTP?

HOMEWORK PROBLEMS AND QUESTIONS         197
	R16.	 Suppose Alice, with a Web-based e-mail account (such as Hotmail or Gmail), 
sends a message to Bob, who accesses his mail from his mail server using 
IMAP. Discuss how the message gets from Alice’s host to Bob’s host. Be 
sure to list the series of application-layer protocols that are used to move the 
message between the two hosts.
	R17.	 Print out the header of an e-mail message you have recently received. How 
many Received: header lines are there? Analyze each of the header lines 
in the message.
	R18.	 What is the HOL blocking issue in HTTP/1.1? How does HTTP/2 attempt to 
solve it? 
	R19.	 Why are MX records needed? Would it not be enough to use a CNAME 
record? (Assume the email client looks up email addresses through a Type A 
query and that the target host only runs an email server.)
	R20.	 What is the difference between recursive and iterative DNS queries?
SECTION 2.5
	R21.	 Under what circumstances is file downloading through P2P much faster 
than through a centralized client-server approach? Justify your answer using 
Equation 2.2.
	R22.	 Consider a new peer Alice that joins BitTorrent without possessing any chunks. 
Without any chunks, she cannot become a top-four uploader for any of the other 
peers, since she has nothing to upload. How then will Alice get her first chunk?
	R23.	 Assume a BitTorrent tracker suddenly becomes unavailable. What are its 
consequences? Can files still be downloaded?
SECTION 2.6
	R24.	 CDNs typically adopt one of two different server placement philosophies. 
Name and briefly describe them.
	R25.	 Besides network-related considerations such as delay, loss, and bandwidth 
performance, there are other important factors that go into designing a CDN 
server selection strategy. What are they?
SECTION 2.7
	R26.	 In Section 2.7, the UDP server described needed only one socket, whereas 
the TCP server needed two sockets. Why? If the TCP server were to support 
n simultaneous connections, each from a different client host, how many 
sockets would the TCP server need?

198         CHAPTER 2    •    APPLICATION LAYER
	R27.	 For the client-server application over TCP described in Section 2.7, why 
must the server program be executed before the client program? For the 
client-server application over UDP, why may the client program be executed 
before the server program?
Problems
	 P1.	 True or false?
a.	 A user requests a Web page that consists of some text and three images. 
For this page, the client will send one request message and receive four 
response messages.
b.	 Two distinct Web pages (for example, www.mit.edu/research 
.html and www.mit.edu/students.html) can be sent over the 
same persistent connection.
c.	 With nonpersistent connections between browser and origin server, it is pos-
sible for a single TCP segment to carry two distinct HTTP request messages.
d.	 The Date: header in the HTTP response message indicates when the 
object in the response was last modified.
e.	 HTTP response messages never have an empty message body.
	 P2.	 SMS, iMessage, Wechat, and WhatsApp are all smartphone real-time mes-
saging systems. After doing some research on the Internet, for each of these 
systems write one paragraph about the protocols they use. Then write a para-
graph explaining how they differ.
	 P3.	 Assume you open a browser and enter http://yourbusiness.com/ 
about.html in the address bar. What happens until the webpage is 
­displayed? Provide details about the protocol(s) used and a high-level 
description of the messages exchanged.
	 P4.	 Consider the following string of ASCII characters that were captured by 
Wireshark when the browser sent an HTTP GET message (i.e., this is the 
actual content of an HTTP GET message). The characters <cr><lf> are 
carriage return and line-feed characters (that is, the italized character string 
<cr> in the text below represents the single carriage-return character that was 
contained at that point in the HTTP header). Answer the following questions, 
indicating where in the HTTP GET message below you find the answer.
GET /cs453/index.html HTTP/1.1<cr><lf>Host: gai
a.cs.umass.edu<cr><lf>User-Agent: Mozilla/5.0 (
Windows;U; Windows NT 5.1; en-US; rv:1.7.2) Gec
ko/20040804 Netscape/7.2 (ax) <cr><lf>Accept:ex
t/xml, application/xml, application/xhtml+xml, text
/html;q=0.9, text/plain;q=0.8,image/png,*/*;q=0.5

PROBLEMS         199
<cr><lf>Accept-Language: en-us,en;q=0.5<cr><lf>Accept-
Encoding: zip,deflate<cr><lf>Accept-Charset: ISO
-8859-1,utf-8;q=0.7,*;q=0.7<cr><lf>Keep-Alive: 300<cr>
<lf>Connection:keep-alive<cr><lf><cr><lf>
a.	 What is the URL of the document requested by the browser?
b.	 What version of HTTP is the browser running?
c.	 Does the browser request a non-persistent or a persistent connection?
d.	 What is the IP address of the host on which the browser is running?
e.	 What type of browser initiates this message? Why is the browser type 
needed in an HTTP request message?
	 P5.	 The text below shows the reply sent from the server in response to the HTTP 
GET message in the question above. Answer the following questions, indicat-
ing where in the message below you find the answer.
HTTP/1.1 200 OK<cr><lf>Date: Tue, 07 Mar 2008
12:39:45GMT<cr><lf>Server: Apache/2.0.52 (Fedora)
<cr><lf>Last-Modified: Sat, 10 Dec2005 18:27:46 
GMT<cr><lf>ETag: ”526c3-f22-a88a4c80”<cr><lf>Accept- 
Ranges: bytes<cr><lf>Content-Length: 3874<cr><lf> 
Keep-Alive: timeout=max=100<cr><lf>Connection:
Keep-Alive<cr><lf>Content-Type: text/html; charset= 
ISO-8859-1<cr><lf><cr><lf><!doctype html public ”- 
//w3c//dtd html 4.0transitional//en”><lf><html><lf> 
<head><lf> <meta http-equiv=”Content-Type”  
content=”text/html; charset=iso-8859-1”><lf> <meta
name=”GENERATOR” content=”Mozilla/4.79 [en] (Windows NT
5.0; U) Netscape]”><lf> <title>CMPSCI 453 / 591 /  
NTU-ST550ASpring 2005 homepage</title><lf></head><lf> 
<much more document text following here (not shown)>
a.	 Was the server able to successfully find the document or not? What time 
was the document reply provided?
b.	 When was the document last modified?
c.	 How many bytes are there in the document being returned?
d.	 What are the first 5 bytes of the document being returned? Did the server 
agree to a persistent connection?
	 P6.	 Obtain the HTTP/1.1 specification (RFC 2616). Answer the following  
questions:
a.	 Explain the mechanism used for signaling between the client and server 
to indicate that a persistent connection is being closed. Can the client, the 
server, or both signal the close of a connection?

200         CHAPTER 2    •    APPLICATION LAYER
b.	 What encryption services are provided by HTTP?
c.	 Can a client open three or more simultaneous connections with a given 
server?
d.	 Either a server or a client may close a transport connection between them 
if either one detects the connection has been idle for some time. Is it 
possible that one side starts closing a connection while the other side is 
transmitting data via this connection? Explain.
	 P7.	 Suppose within your Web browser, you click on a link to obtain a Web page. 
The IP address for the associated URL is not cached in your local host, so 
a DNS lookup is necessary to obtain the IP address. Suppose that n DNS 
servers are visited before your host receives the IP address from DNS; the 
successive visits incur an RTT of RTT1, . . . , RTTn. Further suppose that the 
Web page associated with the link contains exactly one object, consisting of 
a large amount of HTML text. Let RTT0 denote the RTT between the local 
host and the server containing the object. Assuming transmission duration 
of 0.002 * RTT0 of the object, how much time elapses from when the client 
clicks on the link until the client receives the object? 
	 P8.	 Consider Problem P7 again and assume RTT0 = RTT1 = RTT2 = . . . 
RTTn = RTT, Furthermore, assume a new HTML file, small enough to have 
negligible transmission time, which references nine equally small objects on 
the same server. How much time elapses with
a.	 non-persistent HTTP with no parallel TCP connections?
b.	 non-persistent HTTP with the browser configured for 6 parallel ­connections?
c.	 persistent HTTP?
	 P9.	 Consider Figure 2.12, for which there is an institutional network connected to 
the Internet. Moreover, assume the access link has been upgraded to 54 Mbps, 
and the institutional LAN is upgraded to 10 Gbps. Suppose that the average 
object size is 1,600,000 bits and that the average request rate from the institu-
tion’s browsers to the origin servers is 24 requests per second. Also suppose 
that the amount of time it takes from when the router on the Internet side of 
the access link forwards an HTTP request until it receives the response is three 
seconds on average (see Section 2.2.5). Model the total average response time 
as the sum of the average access delay (that is, the delay from Internet router to 
institution router) and the average Internet delay. For the average access delay, 
use ∆/(1 - ∆b), where ∆ is the average time required to send an object over 
the access link and b is the arrival rate of objects to the access link.
a.	 Find the total average response time.
b.	 Now suppose a cache is installed in the institutional LAN. Suppose the 
miss rate is 0.3. Find the total response time.
	P10.	 Consider a 30-meter link, over which a sender can transmit at a rate of 
300 bits/sec in both directions. Suppose that packets containing data are 
100,000 bits long, and packets containing only control (e.g., ACK or 

PROBLEMS         201
­handshaking) are 200 bits long. Assume that N parallel connections each get 
1/N of the link bandwidth. Now, consider the HTTP protocol and suppose 
that each downloaded object is 100 Kbits long, and that the initial down-
loaded object contains 10 referenced objects from the same sender. Would 
parallel downloads via parallel instances of non-persistent HTTP make sense 
in this case? Now consider persistent HTTP. Do you expect significant gains 
over the non-persistent case? Justify and explain your answer.
	P11.	 Consider the scenario introduced in the previous problem. Now, suppose that 
the link is shared by Alice with Bob. Alice does not use parallel instances of 
non-persistent HTTP while Bob uses non-persistent HTTP with five parallel 
downloads each.
a.	 Does Alice have any advantage over Bob? Why or why not?
b.	 If Alice opens five parallel instances of non-persistent HTTP, then would 
her parallel connections be beneficial? Why or why not?
	P12.	 Write a simple TCP program for a server that accepts lines of input from a cli-
ent and prints the lines onto the server’s standard output. (You can do this by 
modifying the TCPServer.py program in the text.) Compile and execute your 
program. On any other machine that contains a Web browser, set the proxy 
server in the browser to the host that is running your server program; also con-
figure the port number appropriately. Your browser should now send its GET 
request messages to your server, and your server should display the messages 
on its standard output. Use this platform to determine whether your browser 
generates conditional GET messages for objects that are locally cached.
	P13.	 Consider sending over HTTP/2 a Web page that consists of one video file 
and three images. Suppose that the video clip is transported as 5000 frames, 
and each image captures four frames.
a.	 If all the video frames are sent first without interleaving, how many 
“frame times” are needed until all images are sent?
b.	 If frames are interleaved, how many frame times are needed until all three 
images are sent?
	P14.	 Consider the Web page in problem 13. Now HTTP/2 prioritization is 
employed. Suppose all the images are given priority over the video clip, and 
that the first image is given priority over the second image, the second image 
over the third image, and so on. How many frame times will be needed until 
the second image is sent?
	P15.	 What is the difference between MAIL FROM: in SMTP and From: in the 
mail message itself?
	P16.	 How does SMTP mark the end of a message body? How about HTTP? Can 
HTTP use the same method as SMTP to mark the end of a message body? 
Explain.

202         CHAPTER 2    •    APPLICATION LAYER
	P17.	 Read RFC 5321 for SMTP. What does MTA stand for? Consider the follow-
ing received spam e-mail (modified from a real spam e-mail). Assuming only 
the originator of this spam e-mail is malicious and all other hosts are honest, 
identify the malacious host that has generated this spam e-mail.
From - Fri Nov 07 13:41:30 2008
Return-Path: <tennis5@pp33head.com>
Received: from barmail.cs.umass.edu (barmail.cs.umass.
edu
[128.119.240.3]) by cs.umass.edu (8.13.1/8.12.6) for
<hg@cs.umass.edu>; Fri, 7 Nov 2008 13:27:10 -0500
Received: from asusus-4b96 (localhost [127.0.0.1]) by
barmail.cs.umass.edu (Spam Firewall) for <hg@cs.umass.
edu>; Fri, 7
Nov 2008 13:27:07 -0500 (EST)
Received: from asusus-4b96 ([58.88.21.177]) by barmail.
cs.umass.edu
for <hg@cs.umass.edu>; Fri, 07 Nov 2008 13:27:07 -0500 
(EST)
Received: from [58.88.21.177] by inbnd55.exchangeddd.
com; Sat, 8
Nov 2008 01:27:07 +0700
From: ”Jonny” <tennis5@pp33head.com>
To: <hg@cs.umass.edu>
 
Subject: How to secure your savings
	P18.	 a.	 What is a whois database?
b.	 Use various whois databases on the Internet to obtain the names of two 
DNS servers. Indicate which whois databases you used.
c.	 Use nslookup on your local host to send DNS queries to three DNS 
servers: your local DNS server and the two DNS servers you found in 
part (b). Try querying for Type A, NS, and MX reports. Summarize your 
findings.
d.	 Use nslookup to find a Web server that has multiple IP addresses. Does 
the Web server of your institution (school or company) have multiple IP 
addresses?
e.	 Use the ARIN whois database to determine the IP address range used by 
your university.
f.	 Describe how an attacker can use whois databases and the nslookup tool 
to perform reconnaissance on an institution before launching an attack.
g.	 Discuss why whois databases should be publicly available.

PROBLEMS         203
	P19.	 In this problem, we use the useful dig tool available on Unix and Linux hosts to 
explore the hierarchy of DNS servers. Recall that in Figure 2.19, a DNS server 
in the DNS hierarchy delegates a DNS query to a DNS server lower in the 
hierarchy, by sending back to the DNS client the name of that lower-level DNS 
server. First read the man page for dig, and then answer the following questions.
a.	 Starting with a root DNS server (from one of the root servers [a-m].
root-servers.net), initiate a sequence of queries for the IP address for your 
department’s Web server by using dig. Show the list of the names of DNS 
servers in the delegation chain in answering your query.
b.	 Repeat part (a) for several popular Web sites, such as google.com, yahoo 
.com, or amazon.com.
	P20.	 Consider the scenarios illustrated in Figures 2.12 and 2.13. Assume the rate 
of the institutional network is Rl and that of the bottleneck link is Rb. Suppose 
there are N clients requesting a file of size L with HTTP at the same time. 
For what values of Rl would the file transfer takes less time when a proxy is 
installed at the institutional network? (Assume the RTT between a client and 
any other host in the institutional network is negligible.)
	P21.	 Suppose that your department has a local DNS server for all computers in the 
department. You are an ordinary user (i.e., not a network/system administra-
tor). Can you determine if an external Web site was likely accessed from a 
computer in your department a couple of seconds ago? Explain.
	P22.	 Consider distributing a file of F = 10 Gbits to N peers. The server has 
an upload rate of us = 1 Gbps, and each peer has a download rate of 
di = 200 Mbps and an upload rate of u. For N = 10, 100, and 1,000 and 
u = 2 Mbps, 10 Mbps, and 100 Mbps, prepare a table giving the minimum 
distribution time in seconds for each of the combinations of N and u for both 
client-server distribution and P2P distribution.
	P23.	 Consider distributing a file of F bits to N peers using a client-server archi-
tecture. Assume a fluid model where the server can simultaneously transmit 
to multiple peers, transmitting to each peer at different rates, as long as the 
combined rate does not exceed us.
a.	 Suppose that us/N … dmin. Specify a distribution scheme that has a distri-
bution time of NF/us.
b.	 Suppose that us/N Ú dmin. Specify a distribution scheme that has a distri-
bution time of F/dmin.
c.	 Conclude that the minimum distribution time is in general given by 
max5NF/us, F/dmin6.
	P24.	 Consider distributing a file of F bits to N peers using a P2P architecture. 
Assume a fluid model. For simplicity assume that dmin is very large, so that 
peer download bandwidth is never a bottleneck.
a.	 Suppose that us … (us + u1 + . . . + uN)/N. Specify a distribution 
scheme that has a distribution time of F/us.

204         CHAPTER 2    •    APPLICATION LAYER
b.	 Suppose that us Ú (us + u1 + . . . + uN)/N. Specify a distribution 
scheme that has a distribution time of NF/(us + u1 + . . . + uN).
c.	 Conclude that the minimum distribution time is in general given by 
max5F/us, NF/(us + u1 + . . . + uN)6.
	P25.	 Consider an overlay network with N active peers, with each pair of peers hav-
ing an active TCP connection. Additionally, suppose that the TCP connec-
tions pass through a total of M routers. How many nodes and edges are there 
in the corresponding overlay network?
	P26.	 Suppose Bob joins a BitTorrent torrent, but he does not want to upload any 
data to any other peers (he wants to be a so-called free-rider).
a.	 Alice who has been using BitTorrent tells Bob that he cannot receive a 
complete copy of the file that is shared by the swarm. Is Alice correct or 
not? Why?
b.	 Charlie claims that Alice is wrong and that he has even been using a col-
lection of multiple computers (with distinct IP addresses) in the computer 
lab in his department to make his downloads faster, using some additional 
coordination scripting. What could his script have done?
	P27.	 Consider a DASH system for which there are N video versions (at N different 
rates and qualities) and N audio versions (at N different rates and qualities). 
Suppose we want to allow the player to choose at any time any of the N video 
versions and any of the N audio versions.
a.	 If we create files so that the audio is mixed in with the video, so server 
sends only one media stream at given time, how many files will the server 
need to store (each a different URL)?
b.	 If the server instead sends the audio and video streams separately and has the 
client synchronize the streams, how many files will the server need to store?
	P28.	 Install the Python programs TCPClient and UDPClient on one host and 
TCPServer and UDPServer on another host.
a.	 Suppose you run TCPServer and you try to connect using UDPClient. 
What happens? Why?
b.	 Suppose you run UDPClient before you run UDPServer. What happens? 
Why?
c.	 What happens if you hardwire in the python client and server programs 
different port numbers for the client and server sides in either a TCP or 
UDP client-server pair?
	P29.	 Suppose that in UDPClient.py, after we create the socket, we add the line:
clientSocket.bind((’’, 5432))
Will it become necessary to change UDPServer.py? What are the port num-
bers for the sockets in UDPClient and UDPServer? What were they before 
making this change?

SOCKET PROGRAMMING ASSIGNMENTS         205
	P30.	 Can you configure your browser to open multiple simultaneous connections 
to a Web site? What are the advantages and disadvantages of having a large 
number of simultaneous TCP connections?
	P31.	 We have seen that Internet TCP sockets treat the data being sent as a byte 
stream but UDP sockets recognize message boundaries. What are one 
advantage and one disadvantage of byte-oriented API versus having the API 
explicitly recognize and preserve application-defined message boundaries?
	P32.	 What is the Apache Web server? How much does it cost? What functional-
ity does it currently have? You may want to look at Wikipedia to answer this 
question.
Socket Programming Assignments
The Companion Website includes six socket programming assignments. The first 
four assignments are summarized below. The fifth assignment makes use of the 
ICMP protocol and is summarized at the end of Chapter 5. It is highly recommended 
that students complete several, if not all, of these assignments. Students can find full 
details of these assignments, as well as important snippets of the Python code, at the 
Web site www.pearsonglobaleditions.com.
Assignment 1: Web Server
In this assignment, you will develop a simple Web server in Python that is capable of 
processing only one request. Specifically, your Web server will (i) create a connection 
socket when contacted by a client (browser); (ii) receive the HTTP request from this 
connection; (iii) parse the request to determine the specific file being requested; (iv) get 
the requested file from the server’s file system; (v) create an HTTP response message 
consisting of the requested file preceded by header lines; and (vi) send the response 
over the TCP connection to the requesting browser. If a browser requests a file that is 
not present in your server, your server should return a “404 Not Found” error message.
In the Companion Website, we provide the skeleton code for your server. Your 
job is to complete the code, run your server, and then test your server by sending 
requests from browsers running on different hosts. If you run your server on a host 
that already has a Web server running on it, then you should use a different port than 
port 80 for your Web server.
Assignment 2: UDP Pinger
In this programming assignment, you will write a client ping program in Python. 
Your client will send a simple ping message to a server, receive a corresponding 
pong message back from the server, and determine the delay between when the client 

206         CHAPTER 2    •    APPLICATION LAYER
sent the ping message and received the pong message. This delay is called the Round 
Trip Time (RTT). The functionality provided by the client and server is similar to the 
functionality provided by standard ping program available in modern operating sys-
tems. However, standard ping programs use the Internet Control Message Protocol 
(ICMP) (which we will study in Chapter 5). Here we will create a nonstandard (but 
simple!) UDP-based ping program.
Your ping program is to send 10 ping messages to the target server over UDP. 
For each message, your client is to determine and print the RTT when the corre-
sponding pong message is returned. Because UDP is an unreliable protocol, a packet 
sent by the client or server may be lost. For this reason, the client cannot wait indefi-
nitely for a reply to a ping message. You should have the client wait up to one second 
for a reply from the server; if no reply is received, the client should assume that the 
packet was lost and print a message accordingly.
In this assignment, you will be given the complete code for the server (available 
in the Companion Website). Your job is to write the client code, which will be very 
similar to the server code. It is recommended that you first study carefully the server 
code. You can then write your client code, liberally cutting and pasting lines from 
the server code.
Assignment 3: Mail Client
The goal of this programming assignment is to create a simple mail client that sends 
e-mail to any recipient. Your client will need to establish a TCP connection with 
a mail server (e.g., a Google mail server), dialogue with the mail server using the 
SMTP protocol, send an e-mail message to a recipient (e.g., your friend) via the mail 
server, and finally close the TCP connection with the mail server.
For this assignment, the Companion Website provides the skeleton code for 
your client. Your job is to complete the code and test your client by sending e-mail 
to different user accounts. You may also try sending through different servers (for 
example, through a Google mail server and through your university mail server).
Assignment 4: Web Proxy
In this assignment, you will develop a Web proxy. When your proxy receives an 
HTTP request for an object from a browser, it generates a new HTTP request for 
the same object and sends it to the origin server. When the proxy receives the cor-
responding HTTP response with the object from the origin server, it creates a new 
HTTP response, including the object, and sends it to the client. 
For this assignment, the Companion Website provides the skeleton code for the 
proxy server. Your job is to complete the code, and then test it by having different 
browsers request Web objects via your proxy.

WIRESHARK LAB: DNS         207
Wireshark Lab: HTTP
Having gotten our feet wet with the Wireshark packet sniffer in Lab 1, we’re now 
ready to use Wireshark to investigate protocols in operation. In this lab, we’ll explore 
several aspects of the HTTP protocol: the basic GET/reply interaction, HTTP message 
formats, retrieving large HTML files, retrieving HTML files with embedded URLs, 
persistent and non-persistent connections, and HTTP authentication and security.
As is the case with all Wireshark labs, the full description of this lab is available 
at this book’s Web site, www.pearsonglobaleditions.com.
Wireshark Lab: DNS
In this lab, we take a closer look at the client side of the DNS, the protocol that 
translates Internet hostnames to IP addresses. Recall from Section 2.5 that the cli-
ent’s role in the DNS is relatively simple—a client sends a query to its local DNS 
server and receives a response back. Much can go on under the covers, invisible to 
the DNS clients, as the hierarchical DNS servers communicate with each other to 
either recursively or iteratively resolve the client’s DNS query. From the DNS cli-
ent’s standpoint, however, the protocol is quite simple—a query is formulated to the 
local DNS server and a response is received from that server. We observe DNS in 
action in this lab.
As is the case with all Wireshark labs, the full description of this lab is available 
at this book’s Web site, www.pearsonglobaleditions.com.

208
AN INTERVIEW WITH...
Tim Berners-Lee
Sir Tim Berners-Lee is known as the inventor of the World Wide 
Web. In 1989, while working as a fellow at CERN, he proposed 
an Internet-based distributed information management system includ-
ing the original version of the HTTP protocol. In the same year he 
successfully implemented his design on a client and server. He 
received the 2016 Turing award for “inventing the World Wide 
Web, the first Web browser, and the fundamental protocols and 
algorithms allowing the Web to scale.” He is the Co-Founder of the 
World Wide Web Foundation, and currently is a Professorial Fellow 
of Computer Science at the University of Oxford and a professor at 
CSAIL at MIT.
You originally studied physics. How is networking similar to physics?
When you study physics, you imagine what rules of behavior on the very small scale could 
possibly give rise to the large-scale world as we see it. When you design a global system 
like the Web, you try to invent rules of behavior of Web pages and links and things that 
could in the large create a large-scale world as we would like it. One is analysis and the 
other synthesis, but they are very similar.
What influenced you to specialize in networking?
After my physics degree, the telecommunications research companies seemed to be the 
most interesting places. The microprocessor had just come out, and telecommunications  
was switching very fast from hardwired logic to microprocessor-based systems. It was  
very exciting.
What is the most challenging part of your job?
When two groups disagree strongly about something, but want in the end to achieve a com-
mon goal, finding exactly what they each mean and where the misunderstandings are can be 
very demanding. The chair of any working group knows that. However, this is what it takes 
to make progress toward consensus on a large scale.
Courtesy of Tim Berners-Lee

209
What people have inspired you professionally?
My parents, who were involved in the early days of computing, gave me a fascination with 
the whole subject. Mike Sendall and Peggie Rimmer, for whom I worked at various times 
at CERN are among the people who taught me and encouraged me. I later learned to admire 
the people, including Vanevar Bush, Doug Englebart, and Ted Nelson, who had had similar 
dreams in their time but had not had the benefit of the existence for PCs and the Internet to 
be able to realize it.

This page is intentionally left blank

211
211
Residing between the application and network layers, the transport layer is a central 
piece of the layered network architecture. It has the critical role of providing com-
munication services directly to the application processes running on different hosts. 
The pedagogic approach we take in this chapter is to alternate between discussions of 
transport-layer principles and discussions of how these principles are implemented 
in existing protocols; as usual, particular emphasis will be given to Internet proto-
cols, in particular the TCP and UDP transport-layer protocols.
We’ll begin by discussing the relationship between the transport and network 
layers. This sets the stage for examining the first critical function of the transport 
layer—extending the network layer’s delivery service between two end systems to 
a delivery service between two application-layer processes running on the end sys-
tems. We’ll illustrate this function in our coverage of the Internet’s connectionless 
transport protocol, UDP.
We’ll then return to principles and confront one of the most fundamental prob-
lems in computer networking—how two entities can communicate reliably over a 
medium that may lose and corrupt data. Through a series of increasingly complicated 
(and realistic!) scenarios, we’ll build up an array of techniques that transport proto-
cols use to solve this problem. We’ll then show how these principles are embodied 
in TCP, the Internet’s connection-oriented transport protocol.
We’ll next move on to a second fundamentally important problem in 
networking—controlling the transmission rate of transport-layer entities in order to 
avoid, or recover from, congestion within the network. We’ll consider the causes 
and consequences of congestion, as well as commonly used congestion-control 
Transport 
Layer
3
CHAPTER
211

212         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
techniques. After obtaining a solid understanding of the issues behind congestion 
control, we’ll study TCP’s approach to congestion control.
3.1	 Introduction and Transport-Layer Services
In the previous two chapters, we touched on the role of the transport layer and the 
services that it provides. Let’s quickly review what we have already learned about 
the transport layer.
A transport-layer protocol provides for logical communication between 
application processes running on different hosts. By logical communication, we 
mean that from an application’s perspective, it is as if the hosts running the pro-
cesses were directly connected; in reality, the hosts may be on opposite sides of the 
planet, connected via numerous routers and a wide range of link types. Application 
processes use the logical communication provided by the transport layer to send 
messages to each other, free from the worry of the details of the physical infra-
structure used to carry these messages. Figure 3.1 illustrates the notion of logical 
communication.
As shown in Figure 3.1, transport-layer protocols are implemented in the end 
systems but not in network routers. On the sending side, the transport layer converts 
the application-layer messages it receives from a sending application process into 
transport-layer packets, known as transport-layer segments in Internet terminology. 
This is done by (possibly) breaking the application messages into smaller chunks 
and adding a transport-layer header to each chunk to create the transport-layer seg-
ment. The transport layer then passes the segment to the network layer at the send-
ing end system, where the segment is encapsulated within a network-layer packet (a 
datagram) and sent to the destination. It’s important to note that network routers act 
only on the network-layer fields of the datagram; that is, they do not examine the 
fields of the transport-layer segment encapsulated with the datagram. On the receiv-
ing side, the network layer extracts the transport-layer segment from the datagram 
and passes the segment up to the transport layer. The transport layer then processes 
the received segment, making the data in the segment available to the receiving 
application.
More than one transport-layer protocol may be available to network applications. 
For example, the Internet has two protocols—TCP and UDP. Each of these protocols 
provides a different set of transport-layer services to the invoking application.
3.1.1 Relationship Between Transport and Network Layers
Recall that the transport layer lies just above the network layer in the protocol 
stack. Whereas a transport-layer protocol provides logical communication between 

3.1    •    Introduction and Transport-Layer Services         213
Network
Link
Physical
Application
Transport
Network
Link
Physical
Application
Transport
Network
Link
Physical
Network
Link
Physical
Network
Link
Physical
Network
Link
Physical
Network
Link
Physical
Content Provider Network
National or
Global ISP
Datacenter Network
Datacenter Network
Mobile Network
Enterprise Network
Home Network
Logical end-to-end transport
Local or
Regional ISP
Figure 3.1  ♦  The transport layer provides logical rather than physical  
communication between application processes

214         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
processes running on different hosts, a network-layer protocol provides logical- 
communication between hosts. This distinction is subtle but important. Let’s exam-
ine this distinction with the aid of a household analogy.
Consider two houses, one on the East Coast and the other on the West Coast, 
with each house being home to a dozen kids. The kids in the East Coast household 
are cousins of the kids in the West Coast household. The kids in the two households 
love to write to each other—each kid writes each cousin every week, with each letter 
delivered by the traditional postal service in a separate envelope. Thus, each house-
hold sends 144 letters to the other household every week. (These kids would save a lot 
of money if they had e-mail!) In each of the households, there is one kid—Ann in the 
West Coast house and Bill in the East Coast house—responsible for mail collection 
and mail distribution. Each week Ann visits all her brothers and sisters, collects the 
mail, and gives the mail to a postal-service mail carrier, who makes daily visits to 
the house. When letters arrive at the West Coast house, Ann also has the job of dis-
tributing the mail to her brothers and sisters. Bill has a similar job on the East Coast.
In this example, the postal service provides logical communication between the 
two houses—the postal service moves mail from house to house, not from person to 
person. On the other hand, Ann and Bill provide logical communication among the 
cousins—Ann and Bill pick up mail from, and deliver mail to, their brothers and sis-
ters. Note that from the cousins’ perspective, Ann and Bill are the mail service, even 
though Ann and Bill are only a part (the end-system part) of the end-to-end delivery 
process. This household example serves as a nice analogy for explaining how the 
transport layer relates to the network layer:
application messages = letters in envelopes
processes = cousins
hosts (also called end systems) = houses
transport-layer protocol = Ann and Bill
network-layer protocol = postal service (including mail carriers)
Continuing with this analogy, note that Ann and Bill do all their work within 
their respective homes; they are not involved, for example, in sorting mail in 
any intermediate mail center or in moving mail from one mail center to another. 
Similarly, transport-layer protocols live in the end systems. Within an end system, a 
transport protocol moves messages from application processes to the network edge 
(that is, the network layer) and vice versa, but it doesn’t have any say about how the 
messages are moved within the network core. In fact, as illustrated in Figure 3.1, 
intermediate routers neither act on, nor recognize, any information that the transport 
layer may have added to the application messages.
Continuing with our family saga, suppose now that when Ann and Bill go on 
vacation, another cousin pair—say, Susan and Harvey—substitute for them and pro-
vide the household-internal collection and delivery of mail. Unfortunately for the 
two families, Susan and Harvey do not do the collection and delivery in exactly 

3.1    •    Introduction and Transport-Layer Services         215
the same way as Ann and Bill. Being younger kids, Susan and Harvey pick up and 
drop off the mail less frequently and occasionally lose letters (which are sometimes 
chewed up by the family dog). Thus, the cousin-pair Susan and Harvey do not pro-
vide the same set of services (that is, the same service model) as Ann and Bill. In 
an analogous manner, a computer network may make available multiple transport 
protocols, with each protocol offering a different service model to applications.
The possible services that Ann and Bill can provide are clearly constrained by 
the possible services that the postal service provides. For example, if the postal ser-
vice doesn’t provide a maximum bound on how long it can take to deliver mail 
between the two houses (for example, three days), then there is no way that Ann and 
Bill can guarantee a maximum delay for mail delivery between any of the cousin 
pairs. In a similar manner, the services that a transport protocol can provide are often 
constrained by the service model of the underlying network-layer protocol. If the 
network-layer protocol cannot provide delay or bandwidth guarantees for transport-
layer segments sent between hosts, then the transport-layer protocol cannot provide 
delay or bandwidth guarantees for application messages sent between processes.
Nevertheless, certain services can be offered by a transport protocol even when 
the underlying network protocol doesn’t offer the corresponding service at the net-
work layer. For example, as we’ll see in this chapter, a transport protocol can offer 
reliable data transfer service to an application even when the underlying network 
protocol is unreliable, that is, even when the network protocol loses, garbles, or 
duplicates packets. As another example (which we’ll explore in Chapter 8 when we 
discuss network security), a transport protocol can use encryption to guarantee that 
application messages are not read by intruders, even when the network layer cannot 
guarantee the confidentiality of transport-layer segments.
3.1.2 Overview of the Transport Layer in the Internet
Recall that the Internet makes two distinct transport-layer protocols available to the 
application layer. One of these protocols is UDP (User Datagram Protocol), which 
provides an unreliable, connectionless service to the invoking application. The sec-
ond of these protocols is TCP (Transmission Control Protocol), which provides a 
reliable, connection-oriented service to the invoking application. When designing a 
network application, the application developer must specify one of these two trans-
port protocols. As we saw in Section 2.7, the application developer selects between 
UDP and TCP when creating sockets.
To simplify terminology, we refer to the transport-layer packet as a segment. We 
mention, however, that the Internet literature (for example, the RFCs) also refers to the 
transport-layer packet for TCP as a segment but often refers to the packet for UDP as 
a datagram. However, this same Internet literature also uses the term datagram for the 
network-layer packet! For an introductory book on computer networking such as this, 
we believe that it is less confusing to refer to both TCP and UDP packets as segments, 
and reserve the term datagram for the network-layer packet.

216         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
Before proceeding with our brief introduction of UDP and TCP, it will be useful 
to say a few words about the Internet’s network layer. (We’ll learn about the network 
layer in detail in Chapters 4 and 5.) The Internet’s network-layer protocol has a 
name—IP, for Internet Protocol. IP provides logical communication between hosts. 
The IP service model is a best-effort delivery service. This means that IP makes 
its “best effort” to deliver segments between communicating hosts, but it makes no 
guarantees. In particular, it does not guarantee segment delivery, it does not guaran-
tee orderly delivery of segments, and it does not guarantee the integrity of the data 
in the segments. For these reasons, IP is said to be an unreliable service. We also 
mention here that every host has at least one network-layer address, a so-called IP 
address. We’ll examine IP addressing in detail in Chapter 4; for this chapter we need 
only keep in mind that each host has an IP address.
Having taken a glimpse at the IP service model, let’s now summarize the service 
models provided by UDP and TCP. The most fundamental responsibility of UDP 
and TCP is to extend IP’s delivery service between two end systems to a delivery 
service between two processes running on the end systems. Extending host-to-host 
delivery to process-to-process delivery is called transport-layer multiplexing and 
demultiplexing. We’ll discuss transport-layer multiplexing and demultiplexing in 
the next section. UDP and TCP also provide integrity checking by including error-
detection fields in their segments’ headers. These two minimal transport-layer 
services—process-to-process data delivery and error checking—are the only two 
services that UDP provides! In particular, like IP, UDP is an unreliable service—it 
does not guarantee that data sent by one process will arrive intact (or at all!) to the 
destination process. UDP is discussed in detail in Section 3.3.
TCP, on the other hand, offers several additional services to applications. First 
and foremost, it provides reliable data transfer. Using flow control, sequence 
numbers, acknowledgments, and timers (techniques we’ll explore in detail in this 
chapter), TCP ensures that data is delivered from sending process to receiving pro-
cess, correctly and in order. TCP thus converts IP’s unreliable service between end 
systems into a reliable data transport service between processes. TCP also provides 
congestion control. Congestion control is not so much a service provided to the 
invoking application as it is a service for the Internet as a whole, a service for the 
general good. Loosely speaking, TCP congestion control prevents any one TCP con-
nection from swamping the links and routers between communicating hosts with 
an excessive amount of traffic. TCP strives to give each connection traversing a 
congested link an equal share of the link bandwidth. This is done by regulating the 
rate at which the sending sides of TCP connections can send traffic into the network. 
UDP traffic, on the other hand, is unregulated. An application using UDP transport 
can send at any rate it pleases, for as long as it pleases.
A protocol that provides reliable data transfer and congestion control is neces-
sarily complex. We’ll need several sections to cover the principles of reliable data 
transfer and congestion control, and additional sections to cover the TCP protocol 
itself. These topics are investigated in Sections 3.4 through 3.7. The approach taken 

3.2    •    Multiplexing and Demultiplexing         217
in this chapter is to alternate between basic principles and the TCP protocol. For 
example, we’ll first discuss reliable data transfer in a general setting and then discuss 
how TCP specifically provides reliable data transfer. Similarly, we’ll first discuss 
congestion control in a general setting and then discuss how TCP performs conges-
tion control. But before getting into all this good stuff, let’s first look at transport-
layer multiplexing and demultiplexing.
3.2	 Multiplexing and Demultiplexing
In this section, we discuss transport-layer multiplexing and demultiplexing, that 
is, extending the host-to-host delivery service provided by the network layer to a 
process-to-process delivery service for applications running on the hosts. In order to 
keep the discussion concrete, we’ll discuss this basic transport-layer service in the 
context of the Internet. We emphasize, however, that a multiplexing/demultiplexing 
service is needed for all computer networks.
At the destination host, the transport layer receives segments from the network 
layer just below. The transport layer has the responsibility of delivering the data in 
these segments to the appropriate application process running in the host. Let’s take 
a look at an example. Suppose you are sitting in front of your computer, and you are 
downloading Web pages while running one FTP session and two Telnet sessions. 
You therefore have four network application processes running—two Telnet pro-
cesses, one FTP process, and one HTTP process. When the transport layer in your 
computer receives data from the network layer below, it needs to direct the received 
data to one of these four processes. Let’s now examine how this is done.
First recall from Section 2.7 that a process (as part of a network application) 
can have one or more sockets, doors through which data passes from the network to 
the process and through which data passes from the process to the network. Thus, 
as shown in Figure 3.2, the transport layer in the receiving host does not actually 
deliver data directly to a process, but instead to an intermediary socket. Because at 
any given time there can be more than one socket in the receiving host, each socket 
has a unique identifier. The format of the identifier depends on whether the socket is 
a UDP or a TCP socket, as we’ll discuss shortly.
Now let’s consider how a receiving host directs an incoming transport-layer 
segment to the appropriate socket. Each transport-layer segment has a set of fields in 
the segment for this purpose. At the receiving end, the transport layer examines these 
fields to identify the receiving socket and then directs the segment to that socket. 
This job of delivering the data in a transport-layer segment to the correct socket is 
called demultiplexing. The job of gathering data chunks at the source host from 
different sockets, encapsulating each data chunk with header information (that will 
later be used in demultiplexing) to create segments, and passing the segments to the 
network layer is called multiplexing. Note that the transport layer in the middle host 

218         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
in Figure 3.2 must demultiplex segments arriving from the network layer below to 
either process P1 or P2 above; this is done by directing the arriving segment’s data 
to the corresponding process’s socket. The transport layer in the middle host must 
also gather outgoing data from these sockets, form transport-layer segments, and 
pass these segments down to the network layer. Although we have introduced mul-
tiplexing and demultiplexing in the context of the Internet transport protocols, it’s 
important to realize that they are concerns whenever a single protocol at one layer (at 
the transport layer or elsewhere) is used by multiple protocols at the next higher layer.
To illustrate the demultiplexing job, recall the household analogy in the previous 
section. Each of the kids is identified by his or her name. When Bill receives a batch 
of mail from the mail carrier, he performs a demultiplexing operation by observing 
to whom the letters are addressed and then hand delivering the mail to his brothers 
and sisters. Ann performs a multiplexing operation when she collects letters from her 
brothers and sisters and gives the collected mail to the mail person.
Now that we understand the roles of transport-layer multiplexing and demulti-
plexing, let us examine how it is actually done in a host. From the discussion above, 
we know that transport-layer multiplexing requires (1) that sockets have unique 
identifiers, and (2) that each segment have special fields that indicate the socket to 
which the segment is to be delivered. These special fields, illustrated in Figure 3.3, 
are the source port number field and the destination port number field. (The UDP 
and TCP segments have other fields as well, as discussed in the subsequent sections 
of this chapter.) Each port number is a 16-bit number, ranging from 0 to 65535. 
The port numbers ranging from 0 to 1023 are called well-known port numbers  
and are restricted, which means that they are reserved for use by well-known 
Network
Key:
Process
Socket
Data link
Physical
Transport
Application
Network
Application
Data link
Physical
Transport
Network
Data link
Physical
Transport
P3
P2
P1
P4
Application
Figure 3.2  ♦  Transport-layer multiplexing and demultiplexing

3.2    •    Multiplexing and Demultiplexing         219
application protocols such as HTTP (which uses port number 80) and FTP (which 
uses port number 21). The list of well-known port numbers is given in RFC 1700 
and is updated at http://www.iana.org [RFC 3232]. When we develop a new appli-
cation (such as the simple application developed in Section 2.7), we must assign the 
application a port number.
It should now be clear how the transport layer could implement the demultiplex-
ing service: Each socket in the host could be assigned a port number, and when 
a segment arrives at the host, the transport layer examines the destination port 
number in the segment and directs the segment to the corresponding socket. The 
segment’s data then passes through the socket into the attached process. As we’ll 
see, this is basically how UDP does it. However, we’ll also see that multiplexing/
demultiplexing in TCP is yet more subtle.
Connectionless Multiplexing and Demultiplexing
Recall from Section 2.7.1 that the Python program running in a host can create a 
UDP socket with the line
clientSocket = socket(AF_INET, SOCK_DGRAM)
When a UDP socket is created in this manner, the transport layer automatically 
assigns a port number to the socket. In particular, the transport layer assigns a port 
number in the range 1024 to 65535 that is currently not being used by any other UDP 
port in the host. Alternatively, we can add a line into our Python program after we 
create the socket to associate a specific port number (say, 19157) to this UDP socket 
via the socket bind() method:
clientSocket.bind((’’, 19157))
Source port #
32 bits
Dest. port #
Other header ﬁelds
Application
data
(message)
Figure 3.3  ♦  Source and destination port-number fields in a transport-layer 
segment

220         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
If the application developer writing the code were implementing the server side of 
a “well-known protocol,” then the developer would have to assign the correspond-
ing well-known port number. Typically, the client side of the application lets the 
transport layer automatically (and transparently) assign the port number, whereas the 
server side of the application assigns a specific port number.
With port numbers assigned to UDP sockets, we can now precisely describe 
UDP multiplexing/demultiplexing. Suppose a process in Host A, with UDP port 
19157, wants to send a chunk of application data to a process with UDP port 46428 in 
Host B. The transport layer in Host A creates a transport-layer segment that includes 
the application data, the source port number (19157), the destination port number 
(46428), and two other values (which will be discussed later, but are unimportant for 
the current discussion). The transport layer then passes the resulting segment to the 
network layer. The network layer encapsulates the segment in an IP datagram and 
makes a best-effort attempt to deliver the segment to the receiving host. If the seg-
ment arrives at the receiving Host B, the transport layer at the receiving host exam-
ines the destination port number in the segment (46428) and delivers the segment 
to its socket identified by port 46428. Note that Host B could be running multiple 
processes, each with its own UDP socket and associated port number. As UDP seg-
ments arrive from the network, Host B directs (demultiplexes) each segment to the 
appropriate socket by examining the segment’s destination port number.
It is important to note that a UDP socket is fully identified by a two-tuple consist-
ing of a destination IP address and a destination port number. As a consequence, if 
two UDP segments have different source IP addresses and/or source port numbers, but 
have the same destination IP address and destination port number, then the two seg-
ments will be directed to the same destination process via the same destination socket.
You may be wondering now, what is the purpose of the source port number? 
As shown in Figure 3.4, in the A-to-B segment the source port number serves as 
part of a “return address”—when B wants to send a segment back to A, the destina-
tion port in the B-to-A segment will take its value from the source port value of the 
A-to-B segment. (The complete return address is A’s IP address and the source port 
number.) As an example, recall the UDP server program studied in Section 2.7. In 
UDPServer.py, the server uses the recvfrom() method to extract the client-
side (source) port number from the segment it receives from the client; it then sends 
a new segment to the client, with the extracted source port number serving as the 
destination port number in this new segment.
Connection-Oriented Multiplexing and Demultiplexing
In order to understand TCP demultiplexing, we have to take a close look at TCP 
sockets and TCP connection establishment. One subtle difference between a 
TCP socket and a UDP socket is that a TCP socket is identified by a four-tuple: 
(source IP address, source port number, destination IP address, destination port 
number). Thus, when a TCP segment arrives from the network to a host, the host 
uses all four values to direct (demultiplex) the segment to the appropriate socket. 

3.2    •    Multiplexing and Demultiplexing         221
In particular, and in contrast with UDP, two arriving TCP segments with differ-
ent source IP addresses or source port numbers will (with the exception of a TCP 
segment carrying the original connection-establishment request) be directed to two 
different sockets. To gain further insight, let’s reconsider the TCP client-server pro-
gramming example in Section 2.7.2:
•	 The TCP server application has a “welcoming socket,” that waits for connection-
establishment requests from TCP clients (see Figure 2.29) on port number 12000.
•	 The TCP client creates a socket and sends a connection establishment request 
segment with the lines:
	 clientSocket = socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM)
	 clientSocket.connect((serverName,12000))
•	 A connection-establishment request is nothing more than a TCP segment with 
destination port number 12000 and a special connection-establishment bit set in 
the TCP header (discussed in Section 3.5). The segment also includes a source 
port number that was chosen by the client.
•	 When the host operating system of the computer running the server process 
receives the incoming connection-request segment with destination port 12000, 
it locates the server process that is waiting to accept a connection on port number 
12000. The server process then creates a new socket:
	 connectionSocket, addr = serverSocket.accept()
Host A
Client process
Socket
Server B
source port:
19157
dest. port:
46428
source port:
46428
dest. port:
19157
Figure 3.4  ♦  The inversion of source and destination port numbers

222         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
•	 Also, the transport layer at the server notes the following four values in the con-
nection-request segment: (1) the source port number in the segment, (2) the IP 
address of the source host, (3) the destination port number in the segment, and 
(4) its own IP address. The newly created connection socket is identified by these 
four values; all subsequently arriving segments whose source port, source IP 
address, destination port, and destination IP address match these four values will 
be demultiplexed to this socket. With the TCP connection now in place, the client 
and server can now send data to each other.
The server host may support many simultaneous TCP connection sockets, with 
each socket attached to a process, and with each socket identified by its own four-
tuple. When a TCP segment arrives at the host, all four fields (source IP address, 
source port, destination IP address, destination port) are used to direct (demultiplex) 
the segment to the appropriate socket.
PORT SCANNING
We’ve seen that a server process waits patiently on an open port for contact by a 
remote client. Some ports are reserved for well-known applications (e.g., Web, FTP, 
DNS, and SMTP servers); other ports are used by convention by popular applications 
(e.g., the Microsoft Windows SQL server listens for requests on UDP port 1434). Thus, 
if we determine that a port is open on a host, we may be able to map that port to a 
specific application running on the host. This is very useful for system administrators, 
who are often interested in knowing which network applications are running on the 
hosts in their networks. But attackers, in order to “case the joint,” also want to know 
which ports are open on target hosts. If a host is found to be running an application 
with a known security flaw (e.g., a SQL server listening on port 1434 was subject to 
a buffer overflow, allowing a remote user to execute arbitrary code on the vulnerable 
host, a flaw exploited by the Slammer worm [CERT 2003–04]), then that host is ripe 
for attack.
Determining which applications are listening on which ports is a relatively easy 
task. Indeed there are a number of public domain programs, called port scanners, 
that do just that. Perhaps the most widely used of these is nmap, freely available at 
http://nmap.org and included in most Linux distributions. For TCP, nmap sequentially 
scans ports, looking for ports that are accepting TCP connections. For UDP, nmap 
again sequentially scans ports, looking for UDP ports that respond to transmitted UDP 
segments. In both cases, nmap returns a list of open, closed, or unreachable ports. 
A host running nmap can attempt to scan any target host anywhere in the Internet. 
We’ll revisit nmap in Section 3.5.6, when we discuss TCP connection management.
FOCUS ON SECURITY

3.2    •    Multiplexing and Demultiplexing         223
The situation is illustrated in Figure 3.5, in which Host C initiates two HTTP 
sessions to server B, and Host A initiates one HTTP session to B. Hosts A and C 
and server B each have their own unique IP address—A, C, and B, respectively. 
Host C assigns two different source port numbers (26145 and 7532) to its two HTTP 
connections. Because Host A is choosing source port numbers independently of C, 
it might also assign a source port of 26145 to its HTTP connection. But this is not 
a problem—server B will still be able to correctly demultiplex the two connections 
having the same source port number, since the two connections have different source 
IP addresses.
Web Servers and TCP
Before closing this discussion, it’s instructive to say a few additional words about 
Web servers and how they use port numbers. Consider a host running a Web server, 
such as an Apache Web server, on port 80. When clients (for example, browsers) 
send segments to the server, all segments will have destination port 80. In particular, 
both the initial connection-establishment segments and the segments carrying HTTP 
source port:
7532
dest. port:
80
source IP:
C
dest. IP:
B
source port:
26145
dest. port:
80
source IP:
C
dest. IP:
B
source port:
26145
dest. port:
80
source IP:
A
dest. IP:
B
Per-connection
HTTP
processes
Transport-
layer
demultiplexing
Web 
server B
Web client
host C
Web client
host A
Figure 3.5  ♦  Two clients, using the same destination port number (80) to 
communicate with the same Web server application

224         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
request messages will have destination port 80. As we have just described, the server 
distinguishes the segments from the different clients using source IP addresses and 
source port numbers.
Figure 3.5 shows a Web server that spawns a new process for each connec-
tion. As shown in Figure 3.5, each of these processes has its own connection socket 
through which HTTP requests arrive and HTTP responses are sent. We mention, 
however, that there is not always a one-to-one correspondence between connection 
sockets and processes. In fact, today’s high-performing Web servers often use only 
one process, and create a new thread with a new connection socket for each new 
client connection. (A thread can be viewed as a lightweight subprocess.) If you did 
the first programming assignment in Chapter 2, you built a Web server that does just 
this. For such a server, at any given time there may be many connection sockets (with 
different identifiers) attached to the same process.
If the client and server are using persistent HTTP, then throughout the duration 
of the persistent connection the client and server exchange HTTP messages via the 
same server socket. However, if the client and server use non-persistent HTTP, then 
a new TCP connection is created and closed for every request/response, and hence 
a new socket is created and later closed for every request/response. This frequent 
creating and closing of sockets can severely impact the performance of a busy Web 
server (although a number of operating system tricks can be used to mitigate the 
problem). Readers interested in the operating system issues surrounding persistent 
and non-persistent HTTP are encouraged to see [Nielsen 1997; Nahum 2002].
Now that we’ve discussed transport-layer multiplexing and demultiplexing, let’s 
move on and discuss one of the Internet’s transport protocols, UDP. In the next sec-
tion, we’ll see that UDP adds little more to the network-layer protocol than a multi-
plexing/demultiplexing service.
3.3	 Connectionless Transport: UDP
In this section, we’ll take a close look at UDP, how it works, and what it does. 
We encourage you to refer back to Section 2.1, which includes an overview of the 
UDP service model, and to Section 2.7.1, which discusses socket programming using 
UDP.
To motivate our discussion about UDP, suppose you were interested in design-
ing a no-frills, bare-bones transport protocol. How might you go about doing this? 
You might first consider using a vacuous transport protocol. In particular, on the 
sending side, you might consider taking the messages from the application process 
and passing them directly to the network layer; and on the receiving side, you might 
consider taking the messages arriving from the network layer and passing them 
directly to the application process. But as we learned in the previous section, we have 

3.3    •    Connectionless Transport: UDP         225
to do a little more than nothing! At the very least, the transport layer has to provide a 
multiplexing/demultiplexing service in order to pass data between the network layer 
and the correct application-level process.
UDP, defined in [RFC 768], does just about as little as a transport protocol can do. 
Aside from the multiplexing/demultiplexing function and some light error checking, it 
adds nothing to IP. In fact, if the application developer chooses UDP instead of TCP, 
then the application is almost directly talking with IP. UDP takes messages from the 
application process, attaches source and destination port number fields for the multi-
plexing/demultiplexing service, adds two other small fields, and passes the resulting 
segment to the network layer. The network layer encapsulates the transport-layer seg-
ment into an IP datagram and then makes a best-effort attempt to deliver the segment 
to the receiving host. If the segment arrives at the receiving host, UDP uses the destina-
tion port number to deliver the segment’s data to the correct application process. Note 
that with UDP there is no handshaking between sending and receiving transport-layer 
entities before sending a segment. For this reason, UDP is said to be connectionless.
DNS is an example of an application-layer protocol that typically uses UDP. 
When the DNS application in a host wants to make a query, it constructs a DNS query 
message and passes the message to UDP. Without performing any handshaking with 
the UDP entity running on the destination end system, the host-side UDP adds header 
fields to the message and passes the resulting segment to the network layer. The net-
work layer encapsulates the UDP segment into a datagram and sends the datagram to 
a name server. The DNS application at the querying host then waits for a reply to its 
query. If it doesn’t receive a reply (possibly because the underlying network lost the 
query or the reply), it might try resending the query, try sending the query to another 
name server, or inform the invoking application that it can’t get a reply.
Now you might be wondering why an application developer would ever choose 
to build an application over UDP rather than over TCP. Isn’t TCP always preferable, 
since TCP provides a reliable data transfer service, while UDP does not? The answer 
is no, as some applications are better suited for UDP for the following reasons:
•	 Finer application-level control over what data is sent, and when. Under UDP, as 
soon as an application process passes data to UDP, UDP will package the data 
inside a UDP segment and immediately pass the segment to the network layer. 
TCP, on the other hand, has a congestion-control mechanism that throttles the 
transport-layer TCP sender when one or more links between the source and des-
tination hosts become excessively congested. TCP will also continue to resend a 
segment until the receipt of the segment has been acknowledged by the destina-
tion, regardless of how long reliable delivery takes. Since real-time applications 
often require a minimum sending rate, do not want to overly delay segment trans-
mission, and can tolerate some data loss, TCP’s service model is not particularly 
well matched to these applications’ needs. As discussed below, these applications 
can use UDP and implement, as part of the application, any additional functional-
ity that is needed beyond UDP’s no-frills segment-delivery service.

226         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
•	 No connection establishment. As we’ll discuss later, TCP uses a three-way hand-
shake before it starts to transfer data. UDP just blasts away without any formal 
preliminaries. Thus UDP does not introduce any delay to establish a connection. 
This is probably the principal reason why DNS runs over UDP rather than TCP—
DNS would be much slower if it ran over TCP. HTTP uses TCP rather than UDP, 
since reliability is critical for Web pages with text. But, as we briefly discussed 
in Section 2.2, the TCP connection-establishment delay in HTTP is an important 
contributor to the delays associated with downloading Web documents. Indeed, 
the QUIC protocol (Quick UDP Internet Connection, [IETF QUIC 2020]), used 
in Google’s Chrome browser, uses UDP as its underlying transport protocol and 
implements reliability in an application-layer protocol on top of UDP. We’ll take 
a closer look at QUIC in Section 3.8.
•	 No connection state. TCP maintains connection state in the end systems. This 
connection state includes receive and send buffers, congestion-control param-
eters, and sequence and acknowledgment number parameters. We will see in 
Section 3.5 that this state information is needed to implement TCP’s reliable data 
transfer service and to provide congestion control. UDP, on the other hand, does 
not maintain connection state and does not track any of these parameters. For this 
reason, a server devoted to a particular application can typically support many 
more active clients when the application runs over UDP rather than TCP.
•	 Small packet header overhead. The TCP segment has 20 bytes of header over-
head in every segment, whereas UDP has only 8 bytes of overhead.
Figure 3.6 lists popular Internet applications and the transport protocols that 
they use. As we expect, e-mail, remote terminal access, and file transfer run over 
TCP—all these applications need the reliable data transfer service of TCP. We 
learned in Chapter 2 that early versions of HTTP ran over TCP but that more recent 
versions of HTTP run over UDP, providing their own error control and congestion 
control (among other services) at the application layer. Nevertheless, many important 
applications run over UDP rather than TCP. For example, UDP is used to carry network 
management (SNMP; see Section 5.7) data. UDP is preferred to TCP in this case, 
since network management applications must often run when the network is in a 
stressed state—precisely when reliable, congestion-controlled data transfer is diffi-
cult to achieve. Also, as we mentioned earlier, DNS runs over UDP, thereby avoiding 
TCP’s connection-establishment delays.
As shown in Figure 3.6, both UDP and TCP are sometimes used today with 
multimedia applications, such as Internet phone, real-time video conferencing, and 
streaming of stored audio and video. We just mention now that all of these applica-
tions can tolerate a small amount of packet loss, so that reliable data transfer is not 
absolutely critical for the application’s success. Furthermore, real-time applications, 
like Internet phone and video conferencing, react very poorly to TCP’s congestion 
control. For these reasons, developers of multimedia applications may choose to run 
their applications over UDP instead of TCP. When packet loss rates are low, and 

3.3    •    Connectionless Transport: UDP         227
with some organizations blocking UDP traffic for security reasons (see Chapter 8), 
TCP becomes an increasingly attractive protocol for streaming media transport.
Although commonly done today, running multimedia applications over UDP 
needs to be done with care. As we mentioned above, UDP has no congestion control. 
But congestion control is needed to prevent the network from entering a congested 
state in which very little useful work is done. If everyone were to start streaming 
high-bit-rate video without using any congestion control, there would be so much 
packet overflow at routers that very few UDP packets would successfully traverse the 
source-to-destination path. Moreover, the high loss rates induced by the uncontrolled 
UDP senders would cause the TCP senders (which, as we’ll see, do decrease their 
sending rates in the face of congestion) to dramatically decrease their rates. Thus, the 
lack of congestion control in UDP can result in high loss rates between a UDP sender 
and receiver, and the crowding out of TCP sessions. Many researchers have proposed 
new mechanisms to force all sources, including UDP sources, to perform adaptive 
congestion control [Mahdavi 1997; Floyd 2000; Kohler 2006: RFC 4340].
Before discussing the UDP segment structure, we mention that it is ­possible 
for an application to have reliable data transfer when using UDP. This can be done 
if reliability is built into the application itself (for example, by adding acknowl-
edgment and retransmission mechanisms, such as those we’ll study in the next 
section). We mentioned earlier that the QUIC protocol implements reliability 
in an application-layer protocol on top of UDP. But this is a nontrivial task that 
would keep an application developer busy debugging for a long time. Neverthe-
less, ­building reliability directly into the application allows the application to “have 
Electronic mail
Remote terminal access
Secure remote terminal access
Web
File transfer
Remote ﬁle server
Streaming multimedia
Internet telephony
Network management
Name translation
SMTP
Telnet
SSH
HTTP, HTTP/3
FTP
NFS
DASH
typically proprietary
SNMP
DNS
TCP
TCP
TCP
TCP (for HTTP), UDP (for HTTP/3) 
TCP
Typically UDP
TCP
UDP or TCP
Typically UDP
Typically UDP
Application
Application-Layer
Protocol
Underlying Transport
Protocol
Figure 3.6  ♦  Popular Internet applications and their underlying transport  
protocols

228         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
its cake and eat it too.” That is, application processes can communicate reliably 
without being subjected to the transmission-rate constraints imposed by TCP’s 
congestion-control mechanism.
3.3.1 UDP Segment Structure
The UDP segment structure, shown in Figure 3.7, is defined in RFC 768. The applica-
tion data occupies the data field of the UDP segment. For example, for DNS, the data 
field contains either a query message or a response message. For a streaming audio 
application, audio samples fill the data field. The UDP header has only four fields, 
each consisting of two bytes. As discussed in the previous section, the port numbers 
allow the destination host to pass the application data to the correct process run-
ning on the destination end system (that is, to perform the demultiplexing function). 
The length field specifies the number of bytes in the UDP segment (header plus 
data). An explicit length value is needed since the size of the data field may differ 
from one UDP segment to the next. The checksum is used by the receiving host to 
check whether errors have been introduced into the segment. In truth, the check-
sum is also calculated over a few of the fields in the IP header in addition to the 
UDP segment. But we ignore this detail in order to see the forest through the trees. 
We’ll discuss the checksum calculation below. Basic principles of error detection are 
described in Section 6.2. The length field specifies the length of the UDP segment, 
including the header, in bytes.
3.3.2 UDP Checksum
The UDP checksum provides for error detection. That is, the checksum is used to 
determine whether bits within the UDP segment have been altered (for example, by 
noise in the links or while stored in a router) as it moved from source to destination. 
Source port #
32 bits
Dest. port #
Length
Checksum
Application
data
(message)
Figure 3.7  ♦  UDP segment structure

3.3    •    Connectionless Transport: UDP         229
UDP at the sender side performs the 1s complement of the sum of all the 16-bit 
words in the segment, with any overflow encountered during the sum being wrapped 
around. This result is put in the checksum field of the UDP segment. Here we give 
a simple example of the checksum calculation. You can find details about efficient 
implementation of the calculation in RFC 1071 and performance over real data in 
[Stone 1998; Stone 2000]. As an example, suppose that we have the following three 
16-bit words:
0110011001100000
0101010101010101
1000111100001100
The sum of first two of these 16-bit words is
0110011001100000
0101010101010101
1011101110110101
Adding the third word to the above sum gives
1011101110110101
1000111100001100
0100101011000010
Note that this last addition had overflow, which was wrapped around. The 1s 
complement is obtained by converting all the 0s to 1s and converting all the 1s to 
0s. Thus, the 1s complement of the sum 0100101011000010 is 1011010100111101, 
which becomes the checksum. At the receiver, all four 16-bit words are added, 
including the checksum. If no errors are introduced into the packet, then clearly the 
sum at the receiver will be 1111111111111111. If one of the bits is a 0, then we know 
that errors have been introduced into the packet.
You may wonder why UDP provides a checksum in the first place, as many 
link-layer protocols (including the popular Ethernet protocol) also provide error 
checking. The reason is that there is no guarantee that all the links between source 
and destination provide error checking; that is, one of the links may use a link-layer 
protocol that does not provide error checking. Furthermore, even if segments are 
correctly transferred across a link, it’s possible that bit errors could be introduced 
when a segment is stored in a router’s memory. Given that neither link-by-link reli-
ability nor in-memory error detection is guaranteed, UDP must provide error detec-
tion at the transport layer, on an end-end basis, if the end-end data transfer service 
is to provide error detection. This is an example of the celebrated end-end principle 
in system design [Saltzer 1984], which states that since certain functionality (error 
detection, in this case) must be implemented on an end-end basis: “functions placed 

230         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
at the lower levels may be redundant or of little value when compared to the cost of 
providing them at the higher level.”
Because IP is supposed to run over just about any layer-2 protocol, it is useful 
for the transport layer to provide error checking as a safety measure. Although UDP 
provides error checking, it does not do anything to recover from an error. Some 
implementations of UDP simply discard the damaged segment; others pass the dam-
aged segment to the application with a warning.
That wraps up our discussion of UDP. We will soon see that TCP offers reli-
able data transfer to its applications as well as other services that UDP doesn’t offer. 
Naturally, TCP is also more complex than UDP. Before discussing TCP, however, 
it will be useful to step back and first discuss the underlying principles of reliable 
data transfer.
3.4	 Principles of Reliable Data Transfer
In this section, we consider the problem of reliable data transfer in a general context. 
This is appropriate since the problem of implementing reliable data transfer occurs 
not only at the transport layer, but also at the link layer and the application layer 
as well. The general problem is thus of central importance to networking. Indeed, 
if one had to identify a “top-ten” list of fundamentally important problems in all 
of networking, this would be a candidate to lead the list. In the next section, we’ll 
examine TCP and show, in particular, that TCP exploits many of the principles that 
we are about to describe.
Figure 3.8 illustrates the framework for our study of reliable data transfer. The 
service abstraction provided to the upper-layer entities is that of a reliable channel 
through which data can be transferred. With a reliable channel, no transferred data 
bits are corrupted (flipped from 0 to 1, or vice versa) or lost, and all are delivered in 
the order in which they were sent. This is precisely the service model offered by TCP 
to the Internet applications that invoke it.
It is the responsibility of a reliable data transfer protocol to implement this 
service abstraction. This task is made difficult by the fact that the layer below the 
reliable data transfer protocol may be unreliable. For example, TCP is a reliable data 
transfer protocol that is implemented on top of an unreliable (IP) end-to-end network 
layer. More generally, the layer beneath the two reliably communicating end points 
might consist of a single physical link (as in the case of a link-level data transfer 
protocol) or a global internetwork (as in the case of a transport-level protocol). For 
our purposes, however, we can view this lower layer simply as an unreliable point-
to-point channel.
In this section, we will incrementally develop the sender and receiver sides of 
a reliable data transfer protocol, considering increasingly complex models of the 
underlying channel. For example, we’ll consider what protocol mechanisms are 

3.4    •    Principles of Reliable Data Transfer         231
needed when the underlying channel can corrupt bits or lose entire packets. One 
assumption we’ll adopt throughout our discussion here is that packets will be deliv-
ered in the order in which they were sent, with some packets possibly being lost; 
that is, the underlying channel will not reorder packets. Figure 3.8(b) illustrates the 
interfaces for our data transfer protocol. The sending side of the data transfer proto-
col will be invoked from above by a call to rdt_send(). It will pass the data to be 
delivered to the upper layer at the receiving side. (Here rdt stands for reliable data 
transfer protocol and _send indicates that the sending side of rdt is being called. 
The first step in developing any protocol is to choose a good name!) On the receiving 
side, rdt_rcv() will be called when a packet arrives from the receiving side of the 
channel. When the rdt protocol wants to deliver data to the upper layer, it will do so 
by calling deliver_data(). In the following, we use the terminology “packet” 
rather than transport-layer “segment.” Because the theory developed in this section 
Reliable channel
Unreliable channel
rdt_send()
udt_send()
Sending
process
Receiver
process
deliver_data()
Application
layer
Transport
layer
a. Provided service
Network
layer
Key:
Data
Packet
b. Service implementation
Reliable data
transfer protocol
(sending side)
Reliable data
transfer protocol
(receiving side)
rdt_rcv()
Figure 3.8  ♦  Reliable data transfer: Service model and service  
implementation

232         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
applies to computer networks in general and not just to the Internet transport layer, 
the generic term “packet” is perhaps more appropriate here.
In this section, we consider only the case of unidirectional data transfer, that is, 
data transfer from the sending to the receiving side. The case of reliable bidirectional 
(that is, full-duplex) data transfer is conceptually no more difficult but considerably 
more tedious to explain. Although we consider only unidirectional data transfer, it is 
important to note that the sending and receiving sides of our protocol will nonetheless 
need to transmit packets in both directions, as indicated in Figure 3.8. We will see 
shortly that, in addition to exchanging packets containing the data to be transferred, 
the sending and receiving sides of rdt will also need to exchange control packets 
back and forth. Both the send and receive sides of rdt send packets to the other side 
by a call to udt_send() (where udt stands for unreliable data transfer).
3.4.1 Building a Reliable Data Transfer Protocol
We now step through a series of protocols, each one becoming more complex, arriv-
ing at a flawless, reliable data transfer protocol.
Reliable Data Transfer over a Perfectly Reliable Channel: rdt1.0
We first consider the simplest case, in which the underlying channel is completely 
reliable. The protocol itself, which we’ll call rdt1.0, is trivial. The finite-state 
machine (FSM) definitions for the rdt1.0 sender and receiver are shown in 
Figure 3.9. The FSM in Figure 3.9(a) defines the operation of the sender, while 
the FSM in Figure 3.9(b) defines the operation of the receiver. It is important to 
note that there are separate FSMs for the sender and for the receiver. The sender 
and receiver FSMs in Figure 3.9 each have just one state. The arrows in the FSM 
description indicate the transition of the protocol from one state to another. (Since 
each FSM in Figure 3.9 has just one state, a transition is necessarily from the one 
state back to itself; we’ll see more complicated state diagrams shortly.) The event 
causing the transition is shown above the horizontal line labeling the transition, and 
the actions taken when the event occurs are shown below the horizontal line. When 
no action is taken on an event, or no event occurs and an action is taken, we’ll use 
the symbol Λ below or above the horizontal, respectively, to explicitly denote the 
lack of an action or event. The initial state of the FSM is indicated by the dashed 
arrow. Although the FSMs in Figure 3.9 have but one state, the FSMs we will see 
shortly have multiple states, so it will be important to identify the initial state of 
each FSM.
The sending side of rdt simply accepts data from the upper layer via the 
rdt_send(data) event, creates a packet containing the data (via the action 
make_pkt(data)) and sends the packet into the channel. In practice, the 
rdt_send(data) event would result from a procedure call (for example, to 
rdt_send()) by the upper-layer application.

3.4    •    Principles of Reliable Data Transfer         233
On the receiving side, rdt receives a packet from the underlying channel via 
the rdt_rcv(packet) event, removes the data from the packet (via the action 
extract (packet, data)) and passes the data up to the upper layer (via 
the action deliver_data(data)). In practice, the rdt_rcv(packet) event 
would result from a procedure call (for example, to rdt_rcv()) from the lower-
layer protocol.
In this simple protocol, there is no difference between a unit of data and a packet. 
Also, all packet flow is from the sender to receiver; with a perfectly reliable chan-
nel there is no need for the receiver side to provide any feedback to the sender since 
nothing can go wrong! Note that we have also assumed that the receiver is able to 
receive data as fast as the sender happens to send data. Thus, there is no need for the 
receiver to ask the sender to slow down!
Reliable Data Transfer over a Channel with Bit Errors: rdt2.0
A more realistic model of the underlying channel is one in which bits in a packet may 
be corrupted. Such bit errors typically occur in the physical components of a network 
as a packet is transmitted, propagates, or is buffered. We’ll continue to assume for 
the moment that all transmitted packets are received (although their bits may be cor-
rupted) in the order in which they were sent.
Before developing a protocol for reliably communicating over such a channel, 
first consider how people might deal with such a situation. Consider how you yourself 
Wait for
call from
above
a.  rdt1.0: sending side
rdt_send(data)
packet=make_pkt(data)
udt_send(packet)
Wait for
call from
below
b.  rdt1.0: receiving side
rdt_rcv(packet)
extract(packet,data)
deliver_data(data)
Figure 3.9  ♦  rdt1.0—A protocol for a completely reliable channel

234         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
might dictate a long message over the phone. In a typical scenario, the message taker 
might say “OK” after each sentence has been heard, understood, and recorded. If the 
message taker hears a garbled sentence, you’re asked to repeat the garbled sentence. 
This message-dictation protocol uses both positive acknowledgments (“OK”) and 
negative acknowledgments (“Please repeat that.”). These control messages allow 
the receiver to let the sender know what has been received correctly, and what has 
been received in error and thus requires repeating. In a computer network setting, 
reliable data transfer protocols based on such retransmission are known as ARQ 
(Automatic Repeat reQuest) protocols.
Fundamentally, three additional protocol capabilities are required in ARQ pro-
tocols to handle the presence of bit errors:
•	 Error detection. First, a mechanism is needed to allow the receiver to detect when 
bit errors have occurred. Recall from the previous section that UDP uses the Inter-
net checksum field for exactly this purpose. In Chapter 6, we’ll examine error-
detection and -correction techniques in greater detail; these techniques allow the 
receiver to detect and possibly correct packet bit errors. For now, we need only 
know that these techniques require that extra bits (beyond the bits of original data 
to be transferred) be sent from the sender to the receiver; these bits will be gath-
ered into the packet checksum field of the rdt2.0 data packet.
•	 Receiver feedback. Since the sender and receiver are typically executing on dif-
ferent end systems, possibly separated by thousands of miles, the only way for 
the sender to learn of the receiver’s view of the world (in this case, whether or not 
a packet was received correctly) is for the receiver to provide explicit feedback 
to the sender. The positive (ACK) and negative (NAK) acknowledgment replies 
in the message-dictation scenario are examples of such feedback. Our rdt2.0 
protocol will similarly send ACK and NAK packets back from the receiver to 
the sender. In principle, these packets need only be one bit long; for example, a 0 
value could indicate a NAK and a value of 1 could indicate an ACK.
•	 Retransmission. A packet that is received in error at the receiver will be retrans-
mitted by the sender.
Figure 3.10 shows the FSM representation of rdt2.0, a data transfer 
protocol employing error detection, positive acknowledgments, and negative 
acknowledgments.
The send side of rdt2.0 has two states. In the leftmost state, the send-side 
protocol is waiting for data to be passed down from the upper layer. When the 
rdt_send(data) event occurs, the sender will create a packet (sndpkt) con-
taining the data to be sent, along with a packet checksum (for example, as discussed 
in Section 3.3.2 for the case of a UDP segment), and then send the packet via the 
udt_send(sndpkt) operation. In the rightmost state, the sender protocol is wait-
ing for an ACK or a NAK packet from the receiver. If an ACK packet is received 

3.4    •    Principles of Reliable Data Transfer         235
(the notation rdt_rcv(rcvpkt) && isACK(rcvpkt) in Figure 3.10 cor-
responds to this event), the sender knows that the most recently transmitted packet 
has been received correctly and thus the protocol returns to the state of waiting for 
data from the upper layer. If a NAK is received, the protocol retransmits the last 
packet and waits for an ACK or NAK to be returned by the receiver in response to 
the retransmitted data packet. It is important to note that when the sender is in the 
wait-for-ACK-or-NAK state, it cannot get more data from the upper layer; that is, the 
rdt_send() event can not occur; that will happen only after the sender receives 
an ACK and leaves this state. Thus, the sender will not send a new piece of data until 
it is sure that the receiver has correctly received the current packet. Because of this 
behavior, protocols such as rdt2.0 are known as stop-and-wait protocols.
Wait for
call from
above
a.  rdt2.0: sending side
b.  rdt2.0: receiving side
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt) && corrupt(rcvpkt)
sndpkt=make_pkt(NAK)
udt_send(sndpkt)
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt) && isNAK(rcvpkt)
udt_send(sndpkt)
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt) && isACK(rcvpkt)
L
rdt_send(data)
sndpkt=make_pkt(data,checksum)
udt_send(sndpkt)
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt) && notcorrupt(rcvpkt)
extract(rcvpkt,data)
deliver_data(data)
sndpkt=make_pkt(ACK)
udt_send(sndpkt)
Wait for
call from
below
Wait for
ACK or
NAK
Figure 3.10  ♦  rdt2.0—A protocol for a channel with bit errors

236         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
The receiver-side FSM for rdt2.0 still has a single state. On packet arrival, 
the receiver replies with either an ACK or a NAK, depending on whether or not the 
received packet is corrupted. In Figure 3.10, the notation rdt_rcv(rcvpkt) && 
corrupt(rcvpkt) corresponds to the event in which a packet is received and is 
found to be in error.
Protocol rdt2.0 may look as if it works but, unfortunately, it has a fatal flaw. 
In particular, we haven’t accounted for the possibility that the ACK or NAK packet 
could be corrupted! (Before proceeding on, you should think about how this prob-
lem may be fixed.) Unfortunately, our slight oversight is not as innocuous as it may 
seem. Minimally, we will need to add checksum bits to ACK/NAK packets in order 
to detect such errors. The more difficult question is how the protocol should recover 
from errors in ACK or NAK packets. The difficulty here is that if an ACK or NAK 
is corrupted, the sender has no way of knowing whether or not the receiver has cor-
rectly received the last piece of transmitted data.
Consider three possibilities for handling corrupted ACKs or NAKs:
•	 For the first possibility, consider what a human might do in the message-dictation 
scenario. If the speaker didn’t understand the “OK” or “Please repeat that” reply 
from the receiver, the speaker would probably ask, “What did you say?” (thus 
introducing a new type of sender-to-receiver packet to our protocol). The receiver 
would then repeat the reply. But what if the speaker’s “What did you say?” is cor-
rupted? The receiver, having no idea whether the garbled sentence was part of the 
dictation or a request to repeat the last reply, would probably then respond with 
“What did you say?” And then, of course, that response might be garbled. Clearly, 
we’re heading down a difficult path.
•	 A second alternative is to add enough checksum bits to allow the sender not only 
to detect, but also to recover from, bit errors. This solves the immediate problem 
for a channel that can corrupt packets but not lose them.
•	 A third approach is for the sender simply to resend the current data packet when 
it receives a garbled ACK or NAK packet. This approach, however, introduces 
duplicate packets into the sender-to-receiver channel. The fundamental diffi-
culty with duplicate packets is that the receiver doesn’t know whether the ACK 
or NAK it last sent was received correctly at the sender. Thus, it cannot know a 
priori whether an arriving packet contains new data or is a retransmission!
A simple solution to this new problem (and one adopted in almost all exist-
ing data transfer protocols, including TCP) is to add a new field to the data packet 
and have the sender number its data packets by putting a sequence number into 
this field. The receiver then need only check this sequence number to determine 
whether or not the received packet is a retransmission. For this simple case of a 
stop-and-wait protocol, a 1-bit sequence number will suffice, since it will allow the 
receiver to know whether the sender is resending the previously transmitted packet 

3.4    •    Principles of Reliable Data Transfer         237
(the sequence number of the received packet has the same sequence number as the 
most recently received packet) or a new packet (the sequence number changes, mov-
ing “forward” in modulo-2 arithmetic). Since we are currently assuming a channel 
that does not lose packets, ACK and NAK packets do not themselves need to indicate 
the sequence number of the packet they are acknowledging. The sender knows that a 
received ACK or NAK packet (whether garbled or not) was generated in response to 
its most recently transmitted data packet.
Figures 3.11 and 3.12 show the FSM description for rdt2.1, our fixed version 
of rdt2.0. The rdt2.1 sender and receiver FSMs each now have twice as many 
states as before. This is because the protocol state must now reflect whether the 
packet currently being sent (by the sender) or expected (at the receiver) should have a 
sequence number of 0 or 1. Note that the actions in those states where a 0-numbered 
packet is being sent or expected are mirror images of those where a 1-numbered 
packet is being sent or expected; the only differences have to do with the handling 
of the sequence number.
Protocol rdt2.1 uses both positive and negative acknowledgments from the 
receiver to the sender. When an out-of-order packet is received, the receiver sends 
a positive acknowledgment for the packet it has received. When a corrupted packet 
Wait for
call 0 from
above
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt)&&
(corrupt(rcvpkt)||
isNAK(rcvpkt))
udt_send(sndpkt)
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt)&&
(corrupt(rcvpkt)||
isNAK(rcvpkt))
udt_send(sndpkt)
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt)
&& notcorrupt(rcvpkt)
&& isACK(rcvpkt)
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt)
&& notcorrupt(rcvpkt)
&& isACK(rcvpkt)
L
L
rdt_send(data)
sndpkt=make_pkt(0,data,checksum)
udt_send(sndpkt)
rdt_send(data)
sndpkt=make_pkt(1,data,checksum)
udt_send(sndpkt)
Wait for
ACK or
NAK 0
Wait for
ACK or
NAK 1
Wait for
call 1 from
above
Figure 3.11  ♦  rdt2.1 sender

238         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
is received, the receiver sends a negative acknowledgment. We can accomplish the 
same effect as a NAK if, instead of sending a NAK, we send an ACK for the last 
correctly received packet. A sender that receives two ACKs for the same packet (that 
is, receives duplicate ACKs) knows that the receiver did not correctly receive the 
packet following the packet that is being ACKed twice. Our NAK-free reliable data 
transfer protocol for a channel with bit errors is rdt2.2, shown in Figures 3.13 and 
3.14. One subtle change between rtdt2.1 and rdt2.2 is that the receiver must 
now include the sequence number of the packet being acknowledged by an ACK 
message (this is done by including the ACK, 0 or ACK, 1 argument in make_pkt() 
in the receiver FSM), and the sender must now check the sequence number of the 
packet being acknowledged by a received ACK message (this is done by including 
the 0 or 1 argument in isACK() in the sender FSM).
Reliable Data Transfer over a Lossy Channel with Bit Errors: rdt3.0
Suppose now that in addition to corrupting bits, the underlying channel can lose 
packets as well, a not-uncommon event in today’s computer networks (including 
the Internet). Two additional concerns must now be addressed by the protocol: how 
to detect packet loss and what to do when packet loss occurs. The use of check-
summing, sequence numbers, ACK packets, and retransmissions—the techniques 
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt)&& notcorrupt
(rcvpkt)&& has_seq0(rcvpkt)
sndpkt=make_pkt(ACK,checksum)
udt_send(sndpkt)
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt) && corrupt(rcvpkt)
sndpkt=make_pkt(NAK,checksum)
udt_send(sndpkt)
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt)
 && corrupt(rcvpkt)
sndpkt=make_pkt(NAK,checksum)
udt_send(sndpkt)
sndpkt=make_pkt(ACK,checksum)
udt_send(sndpkt)
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt) && notcorrupt(rcvpkt)
&& has_seq1(rcvpkt)
extract(rcvpkt,data)
deliver_data(data)
sndpkt=make_pkt(ACK,checksum)
udt_send(sndpkt)
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt)&& notcorrupt(rcvpkt)
 && has_seq0(rcvpkt)
extract(rcvpkt,data)
deliver_data(data)
sndpkt=make_pkt(ACK,checksum)
udt_send(sndpkt)
Wait for
0 from
below
Wait for
1 from
below
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt)&& notcorrupt
(rcvpkt)&& has_seq1(rcvpkt)
Figure 3.12  ♦  rdt2.1 receiver

3.4    •    Principles of Reliable Data Transfer         239
Wait for
call 0 from
above
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt) &&
(corrupt(rcvpkt)||
isACK(rcvpkt,1))
udt_send(sndpkt)
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt) &&
(corrupt(rcvpkt)||
isACK(rcvpkt,0))
udt_send(sndpkt)
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt)
&& notcorrupt(rcvpkt)
&& isACK(rcvpkt,0)
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt)
&& notcorrupt(rcvpkt)
&& isACK(rcvpkt,1)
rdt_send(data)
sndpkt=make_pkt(0,data,checksum)
udt_send(sndpkt)
rdt_send(data)
sndpkt=make_pkt(1,data,checksum)
udt_send(sndpkt)
Wait for
ACK 0
Wait for
ACK 1
L
L
Wait for
call 1 from
above
Figure 3.13  ♦  rdt2.2 sender
already developed in rdt2.2—will allow us to answer the latter concern. Handling 
the first concern will require adding a new protocol mechanism.
There are many possible approaches toward dealing with packet loss (several 
more of which are explored in the exercises at the end of the chapter). Here, we’ll 
put the burden of detecting and recovering from lost packets on the sender. Suppose 
that the sender transmits a data packet and either that packet, or the receiver’s ACK 
of that packet, gets lost. In either case, no reply is forthcoming at the sender from the 
receiver. If the sender is willing to wait long enough so that it is certain that a packet 
has been lost, it can simply retransmit the data packet. You should convince yourself 
that this protocol does indeed work.
But how long must the sender wait to be certain that something has been lost? 
The sender must clearly wait at least as long as a round-trip delay between the sender 
and receiver (which may include buffering at intermediate routers) plus whatever 
amount of time is needed to process a packet at the receiver. In many networks, this 
worst-case maximum delay is very difficult even to estimate, much less know with 
certainty. Moreover, the protocol should ideally recover from packet loss as soon as 
possible; waiting for a worst-case delay could mean a long wait until error recovery 

240         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
is initiated. The approach thus adopted in practice is for the sender to judiciously 
choose a time value such that packet loss is likely, although not guaranteed, to have 
happened. If an ACK is not received within this time, the packet is retransmitted. 
Note that if a packet experiences a particularly large delay, the sender may retrans-
mit the packet even though neither the data packet nor its ACK have been lost. This 
introduces the possibility of duplicate data packets in the sender-to-receiver chan-
nel. Happily, protocol rdt2.2 already has enough functionality (that is, sequence 
numbers) to handle the case of duplicate packets.
From the sender’s viewpoint, retransmission is a panacea. The sender does not 
know whether a data packet was lost, an ACK was lost, or if the packet or ACK was 
simply overly delayed. In all cases, the action is the same: retransmit. Implement-
ing a time-based retransmission mechanism requires a countdown timer that can 
interrupt the sender after a given amount of time has expired. The sender will thus 
need to be able to (1) start the timer each time a packet (either a first-time packet or 
a retransmission) is sent, (2) respond to a timer interrupt (taking appropriate actions), 
and (3) stop the timer.
Figure 3.15 shows the sender FSM for rdt3.0, a protocol that reliably transfers 
data over a channel that can corrupt or lose packets; in the homework problems, you’ll 
be asked to provide the receiver FSM for rdt3.0. Figure 3.16 shows how the pro-
tocol operates with no lost or delayed packets and how it handles lost data packets. In 
Figure 3.16, time moves forward from the top of the diagram toward the bottom of the 
Wait for
0 from
below
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt) &&
(corrupt(rcvpkt)||
has_seq0(rcvpkt))
sndpkt=make_pkt(ACK,0,checksum)
udt_send(sndpkt)
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt) &&
(corrupt(rcvpkt)||
has_seq1(rcvpkt))
sndpkt=make_pkt(ACK,1,checksum)
udt_send(sndpkt)
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt) && notcorrupt(rcvpkt)
&& has_seq1(rcvpkt)
extract(rcvpkt,data)
deliver_data(data)
sndpkt=make_pkt(ACK,1,checksum)
udt_send(sndpkt)
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt) && notcorrupt(rcvpkt)
&& has_seq0(rcvpkt)
extract(rcvpkt,data)
deliver_data(data)
sndpkt=make_pkt(ACK,0,checksum)
udt_send(sndpkt)
Wait for
1 from
below
Figure 3.14  ♦  rdt2.2 receiver

3.4    •    Principles of Reliable Data Transfer         241
diagram; note that a receive time for a packet is necessarily later than the send time for 
a packet as a result of transmission and propagation delays. In Figures 3.16(b)–(d), the 
send-side brackets indicate the times at which a timer is set and later times out. Sev-
eral of the more subtle aspects of this protocol are explored in the exercises at the end 
of this chapter. Because packet sequence numbers alternate between 0 and 1, protocol 
rdt3.0 is sometimes known as the alternating-bit protocol.
We have now assembled the key elements of a data transfer protocol. Check-
sums, sequence numbers, timers, and positive and negative acknowledgment packets 
each play a crucial and necessary role in the operation of the protocol. We now have 
a working reliable data transfer protocol!
3.4.2 Pipelined Reliable Data Transfer Protocols
Protocol rdt3.0 is a functionally correct protocol, but it is unlikely that anyone 
would be happy with its performance, particularly in today’s high-speed networks. 
At the heart of rdt3.0’s performance problem is the fact that it is a stop-and-wait 
protocol.
Wait for
call 0 from
above
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt) &&
(corrupt(rcvpkt)||
isACK(rcvpkt,1))
timeout
udt_send(sndpkt)
start_timer
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt)
L
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt) &&
(corrupt(rcvpkt)||
isACK(rcvpkt,0))
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt)
&& notcorrupt(rcvpkt)
&& isACK(rcvpkt,0)
stop_timer
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt)
&& notcorrupt(rcvpkt)
&& isACK(rcvpkt,1)
stop_timer
timeout
udt_send(sndpkt)
start_timer
rdt_send(data)
sndpkt=make_pkt(0,data,checksum)
udt_send(sndpkt)
start_timer
rdt_send(data)
sndpkt=make_pkt(1,data,checksum)
udt_send(sndpkt)
start_timer
Wait for
ACK 0
Wait for
ACK 1
L
L
Wait for
call 1 from
above
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt)
L
Figure 3.15  ♦  rdt3.0 sender

242         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
rcv pkt0
send ACK0
rcv pkt1
send ACK1
rcv pkt0
send ACK0
Sender
Receiver
a. Operation with no loss
pkt0
ACK0
pkt1
pkt0
ACK1
ACK0
(loss) X
b. Lost packet
rcv pkt0
send ACK0
rcv pkt1
send ACK1
c. Lost ACK
send pkt0
rcv ACK0
send pkt1
rcv ACK1
send pkt0
send pkt0
rcv ACK0
send pkt1
timeout
resend pkt1
rcv ACK1
send pkt0
rcv pkt0
send ACK0
rcv pkt1
(detect
duplicate)
send ACK1
send pkt0
rcv ACK0
send pkt1
rcv pkt0
send ACK0
timeout
resend pkt1
rcv pkt1
send ACK1
d. Premature timeout
rcv ACK1
send pkt0
rcv ACK1
do nothing
rcv pkt0
send ACK0
rcv pkt 1
(detect duplicate)
send ACK1
Sender
Receiver
Receiver
Sender
pkt0
ACK0
pkt1
ACK1
ACK1
ACK0
ACK1
ACK0
pkt1
pkt0
pkt0
pkt1
pkt1
pkt0
ACK1
ACK0
X (loss)
pkt1
rcv pkt0
send ACK0
send pkt0
rcv ACK0
send pkt1
timeout
resend pkt1
rcv ACK1
send pkt0
rcv pkt0
send ACK0
rcv pkt1
send ACK1
Sender
Receiver
pkt0
ACK0
pkt1
pkt0
ACK1
ACK0
Figure 3.16  ♦  Operation of rdt3.0, the alternating-bit protocol

3.4    •    Principles of Reliable Data Transfer         243
To appreciate the performance impact of this stop-and-wait behavior, consider 
an idealized case of two hosts, one located on the West Coast of the United States 
and the other located on the East Coast, as shown in Figure 3.17. The speed-of-light 
round-trip propagation delay between these two end systems, RTT, is approximately 
30 milliseconds. Suppose that they are connected by a channel with a transmission 
rate, R, of 1 Gbps (109 bits per second). With a packet size, L, of 1,000 bytes (8,000 
bits) per packet, including both header fields and data, the time needed to actually 
transmit the packet into the 1 Gbps link is
dtrans = L
R =
8000 bits
109 bits/sec = 8 microseconds
Figure 3.18(a) shows that with our stop-and-wait protocol, if the sender begins 
sending the packet at t = 0, then at t = L/R = 8 microseconds, the last bit enters 
the channel at the sender side. The packet then makes its 15-msec cross-country jour-
ney, with the last bit of the packet emerging at the receiver at t = RTT/2 + L/R =
15.008 msec. Assuming for simplicity that ACK packets are extremely small (so that 
we can ignore their transmission time) and that the receiver can send an ACK as soon 
as the last bit of a data packet is received, the ACK emerges back at the sender at 
t = RTT + L/R = 30.008 msec. At this point, the sender can now transmit the next 
message. Thus, in 30.008 msec, the sender was sending for only 0.008 msec. If we 
define the utilization of the sender (or the channel) as the fraction of time the sender 
is actually busy sending bits into the channel, the analysis in Figure 3.18(a) shows 
that the stop-and-wait protocol has a rather dismal sender utilization, Usender, of
Usender =
L>R
RTT + L>R =
.008
30.008 = 0.00027
Data packets
Data packet
ACK packets
a. A stop-and-wait protocol in operation
b. A pipelined protocol in operation
Figure 3.17  ♦  Stop-and-wait versus pipelined protocol

244         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
First bit of ﬁrst packet
transmitted, t = 0
Last bit of ﬁrst packet
transmitted, t = L/R
First bit of ﬁrst packet
transmitted, t = 0
Last bit of ﬁrst packet
transmitted, t = L/R
ACK arrives, send next packet,
t = RTT + L/R
a. Stop-and-wait operation
Sender
Receiver
RTT
First bit of ﬁrst packet arrives
Last bit of ﬁrst packet arrives, send ACK
First bit of ﬁrst packet arrives
Last bit of ﬁrst packet arrives, send ACK
ACK arrives, send next packet,
t = RTT + L/R
b. Pipelined operation
Sender
Receiver
RTT
Last bit of 2nd packet arrives, send ACK
Last bit of 3rd packet arrives, send ACK
Figure 3.18  ♦  Stop-and-wait and pipelined sending

3.4    •    Principles of Reliable Data Transfer         245
That is, the sender was busy only 2.7 hundredths of one percent of the time! 
Viewed another way, the sender was able to send only 1,000 bytes in 30.008 mil-
liseconds, an effective throughput of only 267 kbps—even though a 1 Gbps link 
was available! Imagine the unhappy network manager who just paid a fortune for 
a gigabit capacity link but manages to get a throughput of only 267 kilobits per 
second! This is a graphic example of how network protocols can limit the capabili-
ties provided by the underlying network hardware. Also, we have neglected lower- 
layer protocol-processing times at the sender and receiver, as well as the process-
ing and queuing delays that would occur at any intermediate routers between the 
sender and receiver. Including these effects would serve only to further increase the 
delay and further accentuate the poor performance.
The solution to this particular performance problem is simple: Rather than oper-
ate in a stop-and-wait manner, the sender is allowed to send multiple packets with-
out waiting for acknowledgments, as illustrated in Figure 3.17(b). Figure 3.18(b) 
shows that if the sender is allowed to transmit three packets before having to wait for 
acknowledgments, the utilization of the sender is essentially tripled. Since the many 
in-transit sender-to-receiver packets can be visualized as filling a pipeline, this tech-
nique is known as pipelining. Pipelining has the following consequences for reliable 
data transfer protocols:
•	 The range of sequence numbers must be increased, since each in-transit packet 
(not counting retransmissions) must have a unique sequence number and there 
may be multiple, in-transit, unacknowledged packets.
•	 The sender and receiver sides of the protocols may have to buffer more than one 
packet. Minimally, the sender will have to buffer packets that have been transmit-
ted but not yet acknowledged. Buffering of correctly received packets may also 
be needed at the receiver, as discussed below.
•	 The range of sequence numbers needed and the buffering requirements will 
depend on the manner in which a data transfer protocol responds to lost, cor-
rupted, and overly delayed packets. Two basic approaches toward pipelined error 
recovery can be identified: Go-Back-N and selective repeat.
3.4.3 Go-Back-N (GBN)
In a Go-Back-N (GBN) protocol, the sender is allowed to transmit multiple packets 
(when available) without waiting for an acknowledgment, but is constrained to have 
no more than some maximum allowable number, N, of unacknowledged packets in 
the pipeline. We describe the GBN protocol in some detail in this section. But before 
reading on, you are encouraged to play with the GBN animation (an awesome inter-
active animation) at the Companion Website.
Figure 3.19 shows the sender’s view of the range of sequence numbers in a GBN 
protocol. If we define base to be the sequence number of the oldest unacknowledged 

246         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
packet and nextseqnum to be the smallest unused sequence number (that is, the 
sequence number of the next packet to be sent), then four intervals in the range of 
sequence numbers can be identified. Sequence numbers in the interval [0,base-1] 
correspond to packets that have already been transmitted and acknowledged. The inter-
val [base,nextseqnum-1] corresponds to packets that have been sent but not 
yet acknowledged. Sequence numbers in the interval [nextseqnum,base+N-1] 
can be used for packets that can be sent immediately, should data arrive from the 
upper layer. Finally, sequence numbers greater than or equal to base+N cannot 
be used until an unacknowledged packet currently in the pipeline (specifically, the 
packet with sequence number base) has been acknowledged.
As suggested by Figure 3.19, the range of permissible sequence numbers for 
transmitted but not yet acknowledged packets can be viewed as a window of size N 
over the range of sequence numbers. As the protocol operates, this window slides 
forward over the sequence number space. For this reason, N is often referred to as the 
window size and the GBN protocol itself as a sliding-window protocol. You might 
be wondering why we would even limit the number of outstanding, unacknowledged 
packets to a value of N in the first place. Why not allow an unlimited number of such 
packets? We’ll see in Section 3.5 that flow control is one reason to impose a limit 
on the sender. We’ll examine another reason to do so in Section 3.7, when we study 
TCP congestion control.
In practice, a packet’s sequence number is carried in a fixed-length field in the 
packet header. If k is the number of bits in the packet sequence number field, the 
range of sequence numbers is thus [0,2k - 1]. With a finite range of sequence num-
bers, all arithmetic involving sequence numbers must then be done using modulo 2k 
arithmetic. (That is, the sequence number space can be thought of as a ring of size 
2k, where sequence number 2k - 1 is immediately followed by sequence number 0.) 
Recall that rdt3.0 had a 1-bit sequence number and a range of sequence numbers 
of [0,1]. Several of the problems at the end of this chapter explore the consequences 
of a finite range of sequence numbers. We will see in Section 3.5 that TCP has a 
32-bit sequence number field, where TCP sequence numbers count bytes in the byte 
stream rather than packets.
Figures 3.20 and 3.21 give an extended FSM description of the sender and 
receiver sides of an ACK-based, NAK-free, GBN protocol. We refer to this FSM 
base
nextseqnum
Window size
N
Key:
Already
ACK’d
Sent, not
yet ACK’d
Usable,
not yet sent
Not usable
Figure 3.19  ♦  Sender’s view of sequence numbers in Go-Back-N

3.4    •    Principles of Reliable Data Transfer         247
rdt_send(data)
if(nextseqnum<base+N){
   sndpkt[nextseqnum]=make_pkt(nextseqnum,data,checksum)
   udt_send(sndpkt[nextseqnum])
   if(base==nextseqnum)
      start_timer
   nextseqnum++
   }
else
   refuse_data(data)
L
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt) && notcorrupt(rcvpkt)
base=getacknum(rcvpkt)+1
If(base==nextseqnum)
   stop_timer
else
   start_timer
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt) && corrupt(rcvpkt)
L
base=1
nextseqnum=1
timeout
start_timer
udt_send(sndpkt[base])
udt_send(sndpkt[base+1])
...
udt_send(sndpkt[nextseqnum-1])
Wait
Figure 3.20  ♦  Extended FSM description of the GBN sender
rdt_rcv(rcvpkt)
  && notcorrupt(rcvpkt)
  && hasseqnum(rcvpkt,expectedseqnum)
extract(rcvpkt,data)
deliver_data(data)
sndpkt=make_pkt(expectedseqnum,ACK,checksum)
udt_send(sndpkt)
expectedseqnum++
L
expectedseqnum=1
sndpkt=make_pkt(0,ACK,checksum)
default
udt_send(sndpkt)
Wait
Figure 3.21  ♦  Extended FSM description of the GBN receiver

248         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
description as an extended FSM because we have added variables (similar to 
programming-language variables) for base and nextseqnum, and added opera-
tions on these variables and conditional actions involving these variables. Note that 
the extended FSM specification is now beginning to look somewhat like a program-
ming-language specification. [Bochman 1984] provides an excellent survey of addi-
tional extensions to FSM techniques as well as other programming-language-based 
techniques for specifying protocols.
The GBN sender must respond to three types of events:
•	 Invocation from above. When rdt_send() is called from above, the sender 
first checks to see if the window is full, that is, whether there are N outstand-
ing, unacknowledged packets. If the window is not full, a packet is created and 
sent, and variables are appropriately updated. If the window is full, the sender 
simply returns the data back to the upper layer, an implicit indication that the 
window is full. The upper layer would presumably then have to try again later. 
In a real implementation, the sender would more likely have either buffered (but 
not immediately sent) this data, or would have a synchronization mechanism 
(for example, a semaphore or a flag) that would allow the upper layer to call 
rdt_send() only when the window is not full.
•	 Receipt of an ACK. In our GBN protocol, an acknowledgment for a packet with 
sequence number n will be taken to be a cumulative acknowledgment, indicat-
ing that all packets with a sequence number up to and including n have been 
correctly received at the receiver. We’ll come back to this issue shortly when we 
examine the receiver side of GBN.
•	 A timeout event. The protocol’s name, “Go-Back-N,” is derived from the sender’s 
behavior in the presence of lost or overly delayed packets. As in the stop-and-wait 
protocol, a timer will again be used to recover from lost data or acknowledgment 
packets. If a timeout occurs, the sender resends all packets that have been previ-
ously sent but that have not yet been acknowledged. Our sender in Figure 3.20 
uses only a single timer, which can be thought of as a timer for the oldest trans-
mitted but not yet acknowledged packet. If an ACK is received but there are still 
additional transmitted but not yet acknowledged packets, the timer is restarted. If 
there are no outstanding, unacknowledged packets, the timer is stopped.
The receiver’s actions in GBN are also simple. If a packet with sequence number 
n is received correctly and is in order (that is, the data last delivered to the upper layer 
came from a packet with sequence number n - 1), the receiver sends an ACK for 
packet n and delivers the data portion of the packet to the upper layer. In all other 
cases, the receiver discards the packet and resends an ACK for the most recently 
received in-order packet. Note that since packets are delivered one at a time to the 
upper layer, if packet k has been received and delivered, then all packets with a 

3.4    •    Principles of Reliable Data Transfer         249
sequence number lower than k have also been delivered. Thus, the use of cumulative 
acknowledgments is a natural choice for GBN.
In our GBN protocol, the receiver discards out-of-order packets. Although 
it may seem silly and wasteful to discard a correctly received (but out-of-order) 
packet, there is some justification for doing so. Recall that the receiver must 
deliver data in order to the upper layer. Suppose now that packet n is expected, but 
packet n + 1 arrives. Because data must be delivered in order, the receiver could 
buffer (save) packet n + 1 and then deliver this packet to the upper layer after it 
had later received and delivered packet n. However, if packet n is lost, both it and 
packet n + 1 will eventually be retransmitted as a result of the GBN retransmis-
sion rule at the sender. Thus, the receiver can simply discard packet n + 1. The 
advantage of this approach is the simplicity of receiver buffering—the receiver 
need not buffer any out-of-order packets. Thus, while the sender must maintain 
the upper and lower bounds of its window and the position of nextseqnum 
within this window, the only piece of information the receiver need maintain is 
the sequence number of the next in-order packet. This value is held in the variable 
expectedseqnum, shown in the receiver FSM in Figure 3.21. Of course, the 
disadvantage of throwing away a correctly received packet is that the subsequent 
retransmission of that packet might be lost or garbled and thus even more retrans-
missions would be required.
Figure 3.22 shows the operation of the GBN protocol for the case of a window 
size of four packets. Because of this window size limitation, the sender sends pack-
ets 0 through 3 but then must wait for one or more of these packets to be acknowl-
edged before proceeding. As each successive ACK (for example, ACK0 and ACK1) 
is received, the window slides forward and the sender can transmit one new packet 
(pkt4 and pkt5, respectively). On the receiver side, packet 2 is lost and thus packets 
3, 4, and 5 are found to be out of order and are discarded.
Before closing our discussion of GBN, it is worth noting that an implementa-
tion of this protocol in a protocol stack would likely have a structure similar to that 
of the extended FSM in Figure 3.20. The implementation would also likely be in 
the form of various procedures that implement the actions to be taken in response to 
the various events that can occur. In such event-based programming, the various 
procedures are called (invoked) either by other procedures in the protocol stack, or 
as the result of an interrupt. In the sender, these events would be (1) a call from the 
upper-layer entity to invoke rdt_send(), (2) a timer interrupt, and (3) a call from 
the lower layer to invoke rdt_rcv() when a packet arrives. The programming 
exercises at the end of this chapter will give you a chance to actually implement these 
routines in a simulated, but realistic, network setting.
We note here that the GBN protocol incorporates almost all of the techniques 
that we will encounter when we study the reliable data transfer components of TCP 
in Section 3.5. These techniques include the use of sequence numbers, cumulative 
acknowledgments, checksums, and a timeout/retransmit operation.

250         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
3.4.4 Selective Repeat (SR)
The GBN protocol allows the sender to potentially “fill the pipeline” in Figure 3.17 
with packets, thus avoiding the channel utilization problems we noted with stop-
and-wait protocols. There are, however, scenarios in which GBN itself suffers from 
performance problems. In particular, when the window size and bandwidth-delay 
product are both large, many packets can be in the pipeline. A single packet error 
can thus cause GBN to retransmit a large number of packets, many unnecessarily. 
As the probability of channel errors increases, the pipeline can become filled with 
these unnecessary retransmissions. Imagine, in our message-dictation scenario, that 
Sender
Receiver
 send pkt0
 send pkt1
 send pkt2
send pkt3
  
(wait)
 rcv ACK0
send pkt4
 rcv ACK1
send pkt5
send pkt2
send pkt3
send pkt4
send pkt5
pkt2 timeout
rcv pkt0
send ACK0
rcv pkt1
send ACK1
rcv pkt3, discard
send ACK1
rcv pkt4, discard
send ACK1
rcv pkt5, discard
send ACK1
rcv pkt2, deliver
send ACK2
rcv pkt3, deliver
send ACK3
X
(loss)
Figure 3.22  ♦  Go-Back-N in operation

3.4    •    Principles of Reliable Data Transfer         251
if every time a word was garbled, the surrounding 1,000 words (for example, a win-
dow size of 1,000 words) had to be repeated. The dictation would be slowed by all 
of the reiterated words.
As the name suggests, selective-repeat protocols avoid unnecessary retrans-
missions by having the sender retransmit only those packets that it suspects were 
received in error (that is, were lost or corrupted) at the receiver. This individual, 
as-needed, retransmission will require that the receiver individually acknowledge 
correctly received packets. A window size of N will again be used to limit the num-
ber of outstanding, unacknowledged packets in the pipeline. However, unlike GBN, 
the sender will have already received ACKs for some of the packets in the window. 
Figure 3.23 shows the SR sender’s view of the sequence number space. Figure 3.24 
details the various actions taken by the SR sender.
The SR receiver will acknowledge a correctly received packet whether or not it is 
in order. Out-of-order packets are buffered until any missing packets (that is, packets 
with lower sequence numbers) are received, at which point a batch of packets can be 
delivered in order to the upper layer. Figure 3.25 itemizes the various actions taken by 
the SR receiver. Figure 3.26 shows an example of SR operation in the presence of lost 
packets. Note that in Figure 3.26, the receiver initially buffers packets 3, 4, and 5, and 
delivers them together with packet 2 to the upper layer when packet 2 is finally received.
send_base
nextseqnum
Window size
N
Key:
Key:
Already
ACK’d
Sent, not
yet ACK’d
Usable,
not yet sent
Not usable
Out of order
(buffered) but
already ACK’d
Expected, not
yet received
Acceptable
(within
window)
Not usable
a. Sender view of sequence numbers
b. Receiver view of sequence numbers
rcv_base
Window size
N
Figure 3.23  ♦  Selective-repeat (SR) sender and receiver views  
of sequence-number space

252         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
It is important to note that in Step 2 in Figure 3.25, the receiver reacknowledges 
(rather than ignores) already received packets with certain sequence numbers below 
the current window base. You should convince yourself that this reacknowledgment 
is indeed needed. Given the sender and receiver sequence number spaces in Fig-
ure 3.23, for example, if there is no ACK for packet send_base propagating from 
1. Data received from above. When data is received from above, the SR sender
checks the next available sequence number for the packet. If the sequence
number is within the sender’s window, the data is packetized and sent; other-
wise it is either buﬀered or returned to the upper layer for later transmission, 
as in GBN.
2. Timeout. Timers are again used to protect against lost packets. However, each
packet must now have its own logical timer, since only a single packet will 
be transmitted on timeout. A single hardware timer can be used to mimic the
operation of multiple logical timers [Varghese 1997].
3. ACK received. If an ACK is received, the SR sender marks that packet as 
having been received, provided it is in the window. If the packet’s sequence
number is equal to send_base, the window base is moved forward to the 
unacknowledged packet with the smallest sequence number. If the window
moves and there are untransmitted packets with sequence numbers that now
fall within the window, these packets are transmitted.
Figure 3.24  ♦  SR sender events and actions
1. Packet with sequence number in [rcv_base, rcv_base+N-1]is cor-
rectly received. In this case, the received packet falls within the receiver’s win-
dow and a selective ACK packet is returned to the sender. If the packet was not
previously received, it is buﬀered. If this packet has a sequence number equal to
the base of the receive window (rcv_base in Figure 3.22), then this packet,
and any previously buﬀered and consecutively numbered (beginning with
rcv_base) packets are delivered to the upper layer. The receive window is
then moved forward by the number of packets delivered to the upper layer. As
an example, consider Figure 3.26. When a packet with a sequence number of
rcv_base=2 is received, it and packets 3, 4, and 5 can be delivered to the
upper layer.
2. Packet with sequence number in [rcv_base-N, rcv_base-1]is cor-
rectly received. In this case, an ACK must be generated, even though this is a
packet that the receiver has previously acknowledged.
3. Otherwise. Ignore the packet.
Figure 3.25  ♦  SR receiver events and actions

3.4    •    Principles of Reliable Data Transfer         253
the receiver to the sender, the sender will eventually retransmit packet send_base, 
even though it is clear (to us, not the sender!) that the receiver has already received 
that packet. If the receiver were not to acknowledge this packet, the sender’s win-
dow would never move forward! This example illustrates an important aspect of 
SR protocols (and many other protocols as well). The sender and receiver will not 
always have an identical view of what has been received correctly and what has not. 
For SR protocols, this means that the sender and receiver windows will not always 
coincide.
pkt0 rcvd, delivered, ACK0 sent
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
pkt1 rcvd, delivered, ACK1 sent
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
pkt3 rcvd, buﬀered, ACK3 sent
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
pkt4 rcvd, buﬀered, ACK4 sent
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
pkt5 rcvd; buﬀered, ACK5 sent
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
pkt2 rcvd, pkt2,pkt3,pkt4,pkt5
delivered, ACK2 sent
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
pkt0 sent
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
pkt1 sent
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
pkt2 sent
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
pkt3 sent, window full
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
ACK0 rcvd, pkt4 sent
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
ACK1 rcvd, pkt5 sent
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
pkt2 TIMEOUT, pkt2
resent
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
ACK3 rcvd, nothing sent
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
X
(loss)
Sender
Receiver
Figure 3.26  ♦  SR operation

254         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
The lack of synchronization between sender and receiver windows has impor-
tant consequences when we are faced with the reality of a finite range of sequence 
numbers. Consider what could happen, for example, with a finite range of four packet 
sequence numbers, 0, 1, 2, 3, and a window size of three. Suppose packets 0 through 
2 are transmitted and correctly received and acknowledged at the receiver. At this 
point, the receiver’s window is over the fourth, fifth, and sixth packets, which have 
sequence numbers 3, 0, and 1, respectively. Now consider two scenarios. In the first 
scenario, shown in Figure 3.27(a), the ACKs for the first three packets are lost and 
the sender retransmits these packets. The receiver thus next receives a packet with 
sequence number 0—a copy of the first packet sent.
In the second scenario, shown in Figure 3.27(b), the ACKs for the first three 
packets are all delivered correctly. The sender thus moves its window forward and 
sends the fourth, fifth, and sixth packets, with sequence numbers 3, 0, and 1, respec-
tively. The packet with sequence number 3 is lost, but the packet with sequence 
number 0 arrives—a packet containing new data.
Now consider the receiver’s viewpoint in Figure 3.27, which has a figurative 
curtain between the sender and the receiver, since the receiver cannot “see” the 
actions taken by the sender. All the receiver observes is the sequence of messages 
it receives from the channel and sends into the channel. As far as it is concerned, 
the two scenarios in Figure 3.27 are identical. There is no way of distinguishing the 
retransmission of the first packet from an original transmission of the fifth packet. 
Clearly, a window size that is 1 less than the size of the sequence number space 
won’t work. But how small must the window size be? A problem at the end of the 
chapter asks you to show that the window size must be less than or equal to half the 
size of the sequence number space for SR protocols.
At the Companion Website, you will find an animation that illustrates the opera-
tion of the SR protocol. Try performing the same experiments that you did with the 
GBN animation. Do the results agree with what you expect?
This completes our discussion of reliable data transfer protocols. We’ve covered 
a lot of ground and introduced numerous mechanisms that together provide for reli-
able data transfer. Table 3.1 summarizes these mechanisms. Now that we have seen 
all of these mechanisms in operation and can see the “big picture,” we encourage you 
to review this section again to see how these mechanisms were incrementally added 
to cover increasingly complex (and realistic) models of the channel connecting the 
sender and receiver, or to improve the performance of the protocols.
Let’s conclude our discussion of reliable data transfer protocols by consider-
ing one remaining assumption in our underlying channel model. Recall that we 
have assumed that packets cannot be reordered within the channel between the 
sender and receiver. This is generally a reasonable assumption when the sender and 
receiver are connected by a single physical wire. However, when the “channel” 
connecting the two is a network, packet reordering can occur. One manifestation of 
packet reordering is that old copies of a packet with a sequence or acknowledgment 

3.4    •    Principles of Reliable Data Transfer         255
pkt0
timeout
retransmit pkt0
0 1 2 3 0 1 2
pkt0
pkt1
pkt2
0 1 2 3 0 1 2
0 1 2 3 0 1 2
0 1 2 3 0 1 2
0 1 2 3 0 1 2
ACK0
ACK1
ACK2
x
0 1 2 3 0 1 2
0 1 2 3 0 1 2
Sender window
(after receipt)
a.
b.
Receiver window
(after receipt)
receive packet
with seq number 0
0 1 2 3 0 1 2
pkt0
pkt1
pkt2
pkt3
pkt0
0 1 2 3 0 1 2
0 1 2 3 0 1 2
0 1 2 3 0 1 2
0 1 2 3 0 1 2
ACK0
ACK1
ACK2
0 1 2 3 0 1 2
0 1 2 3 0 1 2
Sender window
(after receipt)
Receiver window
(after receipt)
receive packet
with seq number 0
0 1 2 3 0 1 2
x
x
x
Figure 3.27  ♦  SR receiver dilemma with too-large windows: A new packet 
or a retransmission?

256         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
number of x can appear, even though neither the sender’s nor the receiver’s win-
dow contains x. With packet reordering, the channel can be thought of as essen-
tially buffering packets and spontaneously emitting these packets at any point in 
the future. Because sequence numbers may be reused, some care must be taken to 
guard against such duplicate packets. The approach taken in practice is to ensure 
that a sequence number is not reused until the sender is “sure” that any previously 
sent packets with sequence number x are no longer in the network. This is done 
by assuming that a packet cannot “live” in the network for longer than some fixed 
maximum amount of time. A maximum packet lifetime of approximately three 
minutes is assumed in the TCP extensions for high-speed networks [RFC 7323]. 
[Sunshine 1978] describes a method for using sequence numbers such that reorder-
ing problems can be completely avoided.
Table 3.1  ♦  Summary of reliable data transfer mechanisms and their use
Mechanism
Use, Comments
Checksum
Used to detect bit errors in a transmitted packet.
Timer
Used to timeout/retransmit a packet, possibly because the packet (or its ACK) 
was lost within the channel. Because timeouts can occur when a packet is delayed 
but not lost (premature timeout), or when a packet has been received by the 
receiver but the receiver-to-sender ACK has been lost, duplicate copies of a packet 
may be received by a receiver.
Sequence number
Used for sequential numbering of packets of data flowing from sender to receiver. 
Gaps in the sequence numbers of received packets allow the receiver to detect a 
lost packet. Packets with duplicate sequence numbers allow the receiver to detect 
duplicate copies of a packet.
Acknowledgment
Used by the receiver to tell the sender that a packet or set of packets has been 
received correctly. Acknowledgments will typically carry the sequence number of 
the packet or packets being acknowledged. Acknowledgments may be individual 
or cumulative, depending on the protocol.
Negative acknowledgment
Used by the receiver to tell the sender that a packet has not been received 
correctly. Negative acknowledgments will typically carry the sequence number  
of the packet that was not received correctly.
Window, pipelining
The sender may be restricted to sending only packets with sequence numbers that 
fall within a given range. By allowing multiple packets to be transmitted but not 
yet acknowledged, sender utilization can be increased over a stop-and-wait mode 
of operation. We’ll see shortly that the window size may be set on the basis of 
the receiver’s ability to receive and buffer messages, or the level of congestion in 
the network, or both.

3.5    •    Connection-Oriented Transport: TCP         257
3.5	 Connection-Oriented Transport: TCP
Now that we have covered the underlying principles of reliable data transfer, 
let’s turn to TCP—the Internet’s transport-layer, connection-oriented, reliable 
transport protocol. In this section, we’ll see that in order to provide reliable 
data transfer, TCP relies on many of the underlying principles discussed in 
the previous section, including error detection, retransmissions, cumulative 
acknowledgments, timers, and header fields for sequence and acknowledgment 
numbers. TCP is defined in RFC 793, RFC 1122, RFC 2018, RFC 5681, and 
RFC 7323.
3.5.1 The TCP Connection
TCP is said to be connection-oriented because before one application process can 
begin to send data to another, the two processes must first “handshake” with each 
other—that is, they must send some preliminary segments to each other to establish 
the parameters of the ensuing data transfer. As part of TCP connection establish-
ment, both sides of the connection will initialize many TCP state variables (many of 
which will be discussed in this section and in Section 3.7) associated with the TCP 
connection.
The TCP “connection” is not an end-to-end TDM or FDM circuit as in a circuit-
switched network. Instead, the “connection” is a logical one, with common state 
residing only in the TCPs in the two communicating end systems. Recall that because 
the TCP protocol runs only in the end systems and not in the intermediate network 
elements (routers and link-layer switches), the intermediate network elements do 
not maintain TCP connection state. In fact, the intermediate routers are completely 
oblivious to TCP connections; they see datagrams, not connections.
A TCP connection provides a full-duplex service: If there is a TCP con-
nection between Process A on one host and Process B on another host, then 
application-layer data can flow from Process A to Process B at the same time 
as application-layer data flows from Process B to Process A. A TCP connec-
tion is also always point-to-point, that is, between a single sender and a single 
receiver. So-called “multicasting” (see the online supplementary materials for 
this text)—the transfer of data from one sender to many receivers in a single 
send operation—is not possible with TCP. With TCP, two hosts are company 
and three are a crowd!
Let’s now take a look at how a TCP connection is established. Suppose a process 
running in one host wants to initiate a connection with another process in another 
host. Recall that the process that is initiating the connection is called the client 
process, while the other process is called the server process. The client application 
process first informs the client transport layer that it wants to establish a connection 

258         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
to a process in the server. Recall from Section 2.7.2, a Python client program does 
this by issuing the command
clientSocket.connect((serverName,serverPort))
where serverName is the name of the server and serverPort identifies the 
process on the server. TCP in the client then proceeds to establish a TCP connec-
tion with TCP in the server. At the end of this section we discuss in some detail the 
connection-establishment procedure. For now it suffices to know that the client first 
sends a special TCP segment; the server responds with a second special TCP seg-
ment; and finally the client responds again with a third special segment. The first 
two segments carry no payload, that is, no application-layer data; the third of these 
segments may carry a payload. Because three segments are sent between the two 
hosts, this connection-establishment procedure is often referred to as a three-way 
handshake.
VINTON CERF, ROBERT KAHN, AND TCP/IP
In the early 1970s, packet-switched networks began to proliferate, with the 
ARPAnet—the precursor of the Internet—being just one of many networks. Each of 
these networks had its own protocol. Two researchers, Vinton Cerf and Robert Kahn, 
recognized the importance of interconnecting these networks and invented a cross-
network protocol called TCP/IP, which stands for Transmission Control Protocol/
Internet Protocol. Although Cerf and Kahn began by seeing the protocol as a single 
entity, it was later split into its two parts, TCP and IP, which operated separately. 
Cerf and Kahn published a paper on TCP/IP in May 1974 in IEEE Transactions on 
Communications Technology [Cerf 1974].
The TCP/IP protocol, which is the bread and butter of today’s Internet, was 
devised before PCs, workstations, smartphones, and tablets, before the prolifera-
tion of Ethernet, cable, and DSL, WiFi, and other access network technologies, and 
before the Web, social media, and streaming video. Cerf and Kahn saw the need 
for a networking protocol that, on the one hand, provides broad support for yet-to-
be-defined applications and, on the other hand, allows arbitrary hosts and link-layer 
protocols to interoperate.
In 2004, Cerf and Kahn received the ACM’s Turing Award, considered the 
“Nobel Prize of Computing” for “pioneering work on internetworking, including the 
design and implementation of the Internet’s basic communications protocols, TCP/IP, 
and for inspired leadership in networking.”
CASE HISTORY

3.5    •    Connection-Oriented Transport: TCP         259
Once a TCP connection is established, the two application processes can send 
data to each other. Let’s consider the sending of data from the client process to the 
server process. The client process passes a stream of data through the socket (the door 
of the process), as described in Section 2.7. Once the data passes through the door, 
the data is in the hands of TCP running in the client. As shown in Figure 3.28, TCP 
directs this data to the connection’s send buffer, which is one of the buffers that is 
set aside during the initial three-way handshake. From time to time, TCP will grab 
chunks of data from the send buffer and pass the data to the network layer. Interest-
ingly, the TCP specification [RFC 793] is very laid back about specifying when TCP 
should actually send buffered data, stating that TCP should “send that data in seg-
ments at its own convenience.” The maximum amount of data that can be grabbed 
and placed in a segment is limited by the maximum segment size (MSS). The MSS 
is typically set by first determining the length of the largest link-layer frame that 
can be sent by the local sending host (the so-called maximum transmission unit, 
MTU), and then setting the MSS to ensure that a TCP segment (when encapsulated 
in an IP datagram) plus the TCP/IP header length (typically 40 bytes) will fit into a 
single link-layer frame. Both Ethernet and PPP link-layer protocols have an MTU of 
1,500 bytes. Thus, a typical value of MSS is 1460 bytes. Approaches have also been 
proposed for discovering the path MTU—the largest link-layer frame that can be sent 
on all links from source to destination [RFC 1191]—and setting the MSS based on 
the path MTU value. Note that the MSS is the maximum amount of application-layer 
data in the segment, not the maximum size of the TCP segment including headers. 
(This terminology is confusing, but we have to live with it, as it is well entrenched.)
TCP pairs each chunk of client data with a TCP header, thereby forming TCP 
segments. The segments are passed down to the network layer, where they are sepa-
rately encapsulated within network-layer IP datagrams. The IP datagrams are then 
sent into the network. When TCP receives a segment at the other end, the segment’s 
data is placed in the TCP connection’s receive buffer, as shown in Figure 3.28. The 
application reads the stream of data from this buffer. Each side of the connection has 
Process
writes data
Process
reads data
TCP
send
buffer
Socket
TCP
receive
buffer
Socket
Segment
Segment
Figure 3.28  ♦  TCP send and receive buffers

260         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
its own send buffer and its own receive buffer. (You can see the online flow-control 
interactive animation  at http://www.awl.com/kurose-ross, which provides an anima-
tion of the send and receive buffers.)
We see from this discussion that a TCP connection consists of buffers, variables, 
and a socket connection to a process in one host, and another set of buffers, vari-
ables, and a socket connection to a process in another host. As mentioned earlier, no 
buffers or variables are allocated to the connection in the network elements (routers, 
switches, and repeaters) between the hosts.
3.5.2 TCP Segment Structure
Having taken a brief look at the TCP connection, let’s examine the TCP segment 
structure. The TCP segment consists of header fields and a data field. The data field 
contains a chunk of application data. As mentioned above, the MSS limits the maxi-
mum size of a segment’s data field. When TCP sends a large file, such as an image as 
part of a Web page, it typically breaks the file into chunks of size MSS (except for the 
last chunk, which will often be less than the MSS). Interactive applications, however, 
often transmit data chunks that are smaller than the MSS; for example, with remote 
login applications such as Telnet and ssh, the data field in the TCP segment is often 
only one byte. Because the TCP header is typically 20 bytes (12 bytes more than the 
UDP header), segments sent by Telnet and ssh may be only 21 bytes in length.
Figure 3.29 shows the structure of the TCP segment. As with UDP, the header 
includes source and destination port numbers, which are used for multiplexing/
demultiplexing data from/to upper-layer applications. Also, as with UDP, the header 
includes a checksum field. A TCP segment header also contains the following fields:
•	 The 32-bit sequence number field and the 32-bit acknowledgment number 
field are used by the TCP sender and receiver in implementing a reliable data 
transfer service, as discussed below.
•	 The 16-bit receive window field is used for flow control. We will see shortly that 
it is used to indicate the number of bytes that a receiver is willing to accept.
•	 The 4-bit header length field specifies the length of the TCP header in 32-bit 
words. The TCP header can be of variable length due to the TCP options field. 
(Typically, the options field is empty, so that the length of the typical TCP header 
is 20 bytes.)
•	 The optional and variable-length options field is used when a sender and receiver 
negotiate the maximum segment size (MSS) or as a window scaling factor for use 
in high-speed networks. A time-stamping option is also defined. See RFC 854 
and RFC 1323 for additional details.
•	 The flag field contains 6 bits. The ACK bit is used to indicate that the value 
carried in the acknowledgment field is valid; that is, the segment contains an 
acknowledgment for a segment that has been successfully received. The RST, 

3.5    •    Connection-Oriented Transport: TCP         261
SYN, and FIN bits are used for connection setup and teardown, as we will discuss 
at the end of this section. The CWR and ECE bits are used in explicit congestion 
notification, as discussed in Section 3.7.2. Setting the PSH bit indicates that the 
receiver should pass the data to the upper layer immediately. Finally, the URG bit 
is used to indicate that there is data in this segment that the sending-side upper-
layer entity has marked as “urgent.” The location of the last byte of this urgent 
data is indicated by the 16-bit urgent data pointer field. TCP must inform the 
receiving-side upper-layer entity when urgent data exists and pass it a pointer to 
the end of the urgent data. (In practice, the PSH, URG, and the urgent data pointer 
are not used. However, we mention these fields for completeness.)
Our experience as teachers is that our students sometimes find discussion of 
packet formats rather dry and perhaps a bit boring. For a fun and fanciful look at 
TCP header fields, particularly if you love Legos™ as we do, see [Pomeranz 2010].
Sequence Numbers and Acknowledgment Numbers
Two of the most important fields in the TCP segment header are the sequence number 
field and the acknowledgment number field. These fields are a critical part of TCP’s 
reliable data transfer service. But before discussing how these fields are used to pro-
vide reliable data transfer, let us first explain what exactly TCP puts in these fields.
Source port #
Internet checksum
Header
length
Unused
URG
ECE
CWR
ACK
PSH
RST
SYN
FIN
32 bits
Dest port #
Receive window
Urgent data pointer
Sequence number
Acknowledgment number
Options
Data
Figure 3.29  ♦  TCP segment structure

262         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
TCP views data as an unstructured, but ordered, stream of bytes. TCP’s use of 
sequence numbers reflects this view in that sequence numbers are over the stream 
of transmitted bytes and not over the series of transmitted segments. The sequence 
number for a segment is therefore the byte-stream number of the first byte in the 
segment. Let’s look at an example. Suppose that a process in Host A wants to send a 
stream of data to a process in Host B over a TCP connection. The TCP in Host A will 
implicitly number each byte in the data stream. Suppose that the data stream consists 
of a file consisting of 500,000 bytes, that the MSS is 1,000 bytes, and that the first 
byte of the data stream is numbered 0. As shown in Figure 3.30, TCP constructs 500 
segments out of the data stream. The first segment gets assigned sequence number 
0, the second segment gets assigned sequence number 1,000, the third segment gets 
assigned sequence number 2,000, and so on. Each sequence number is inserted in the 
sequence number field in the header of the appropriate TCP segment.
Now let’s consider acknowledgment numbers. These are a little trickier than 
sequence numbers. Recall that TCP is full-duplex, so that Host A may be receiving 
data from Host B while it sends data to Host B (as part of the same TCP connection). 
Each of the segments that arrive from Host B has a sequence number for the data 
flowing from B to A. The acknowledgment number that Host A puts in its segment 
is the sequence number of the next byte Host A is expecting from Host B. It is good 
to look at a few examples to understand what is going on here. Suppose that Host A 
has received all bytes numbered 0 through 535 from B and suppose that it is about 
to send a segment to Host B. Host A is waiting for byte 536 and all the subsequent 
bytes in Host B’s data stream. So Host A puts 536 in the acknowledgment number 
field of the segment it sends to B.
As another example, suppose that Host A has received one segment from Host 
B containing bytes 0 through 535 and another segment containing bytes 900 through 
1,000. For some reason Host A has not yet received bytes 536 through 899. In this 
example, Host A is still waiting for byte 536 (and beyond) in order to re-create B’s 
data stream. Thus, A’s next segment to B will contain 536 in the acknowledgment 
number field. Because TCP only acknowledges bytes up to the first missing byte in 
the stream, TCP is said to provide cumulative acknowledgments.
0
1
1,000
1,999
499,999
File
Data for 1st segment
Data for 2nd segment
Figure 3.30  ♦  Dividing file data into TCP segments

3.5    •    Connection-Oriented Transport: TCP         263
This last example also brings up an important but subtle issue. Host A received 
the third segment (bytes 900 through 1,000) before receiving the second segment 
(bytes 536 through 899). Thus, the third segment arrived out of order. The sub-
tle issue is: What does a host do when it receives out-of-order segments in a TCP 
connection? Interestingly, the TCP RFCs do not impose any rules here and leave 
the decision up to the programmers implementing a TCP implementation. There 
are basically two choices: either (1) the receiver immediately discards out-of-order 
segments (which, as we discussed earlier, can simplify receiver design), or (2) the 
receiver keeps the out-of-order bytes and waits for the missing bytes to fill in the 
gaps. Clearly, the latter choice is more efficient in terms of network bandwidth, and 
is the approach taken in practice.
In Figure 3.30, we assumed that the initial sequence number was zero. In truth, 
both sides of a TCP connection randomly choose an initial sequence number. This 
is done to minimize the possibility that a segment that is still present in the network 
from an earlier, already-terminated connection between two hosts is mistaken for a 
valid segment in a later connection between these same two hosts (which also happen 
to be using the same port numbers as the old connection) [Sunshine 1978].
Telnet: A Case Study for Sequence and Acknowledgment Numbers
Telnet, defined in RFC 854, is a popular application-layer protocol used for remote 
login. It runs over TCP and is designed to work between any pair of hosts. Unlike the 
bulk data transfer applications discussed in Chapter 2, Telnet is an interactive appli-
cation. We discuss a Telnet example here, as it nicely illustrates TCP sequence and 
acknowledgment numbers. We note that many users now prefer to use the SSH proto-
col rather than Telnet, since data sent in a Telnet connection (including passwords!) 
are not encrypted, making Telnet vulnerable to eavesdropping attacks (as discussed 
in Section 8.7).
Suppose Host A initiates a Telnet session with Host B. Because Host A initiates 
the session, it is labeled the client, and Host B is labeled the server. Each character 
typed by the user (at the client) will be sent to the remote host; the remote host will 
send back a copy of each character, which will be displayed on the Telnet user’s 
screen. This “echo back” is used to ensure that characters seen by the Telnet user 
have already been received and processed at the remote site. Each character thus 
traverses the network twice between the time the user hits the key and the time the 
character is displayed on the user’s monitor.
Now suppose the user types a single letter, ‘C,’ and then grabs a coffee. Let’s 
examine the TCP segments that are sent between the client and server. As shown 
in Figure 3.31, we suppose the starting sequence numbers are 42 and 79 for the cli-
ent and server, respectively. Recall that the sequence number of a segment is the 
sequence number of the first byte in the data field. Thus, the first segment sent from 
the client will have sequence number 42; the first segment sent from the server will 
have sequence number 79. Recall that the acknowledgment number is the sequence 

264         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
number of the next byte of data that the host is waiting for. After the TCP connec-
tion is established but before any data is sent, the client is waiting for byte 79 and the 
server is waiting for byte 42.
As shown in Figure 3.31, three segments are sent. The first segment is sent from 
the client to the server, containing the 1-byte ASCII representation of the letter ‘C’ in 
its data field. This first segment also has 42 in its sequence number field, as we just 
described. Also, because the client has not yet received any data from the server, this 
first segment will have 79 in its acknowledgment number field.
The second segment is sent from the server to the client. It serves a dual purpose. 
First it provides an acknowledgment of the data the server has received. By putting 
43 in the acknowledgment field, the server is telling the client that it has successfully 
received everything up through byte 42 and is now waiting for bytes 43 onward. The 
second purpose of this segment is to echo back the letter ‘C.’ Thus, the second seg-
ment has the ASCII representation of ‘C’ in its data field. This second segment has 
the sequence number 79, the initial sequence number of the server-to-client data flow 
of this TCP connection, as this is the very first byte of data that the server is send-
ing. Note that the acknowledgment for client-to-server data is carried in a segment 
Time
Time
Host A
Host B
User types
'C'
Seq=42, ACK=79, data='C'
Seq=79, ACK=43, data='C'
Seq=43, ACK=80
Host ACKs
receipt of 'C',
echoes back 'C'
Host ACKs
receipt of
echoed 'C'
Figure 3.31  ♦  Sequence and acknowledgment numbers for a simple Telnet 
application over TCP

3.5    •    Connection-Oriented Transport: TCP         265
carrying server-to-client data; this acknowledgment is said to be piggybacked on the 
server-to-client data segment.
The third segment is sent from the client to the server. Its sole purpose is to 
acknowledge the data it has received from the server. (Recall that the second seg-
ment contained data—the letter ‘C’—from the server to the client.) This segment 
has an empty data field (that is, the acknowledgment is not being piggybacked with 
any client-to-server data). The segment has 80 in the acknowledgment number field 
because the client has received the stream of bytes up through byte sequence number 
79 and it is now waiting for bytes 80 onward. You might think it odd that this seg-
ment also has a sequence number since the segment contains no data. But because 
TCP has a sequence number field, the segment needs to have some sequence number.
3.5.3 Round-Trip Time Estimation and Timeout
TCP, like our rdt protocol in Section 3.4, uses a timeout/retransmit mechanism to 
recover from lost segments. Although this is conceptually simple, many subtle issues 
arise when we implement a timeout/retransmit mechanism in an actual protocol such 
as TCP. Perhaps the most obvious question is the length of the timeout intervals. 
Clearly, the timeout should be larger than the connection’s round-trip time (RTT), 
that is, the time from when a segment is sent until it is acknowledged. Otherwise, 
unnecessary retransmissions would be sent. But how much larger? How should the 
RTT be estimated in the first place? Should a timer be associated with each and 
every unacknowledged segment? So many questions! Our discussion in this section 
is based on the TCP work in [Jacobson 1988] and the current IETF recommendations 
for managing TCP timers [RFC 6298].
Estimating the Round-Trip Time
Let’s begin our study of TCP timer management by considering how TCP estimates 
the round-trip time between sender and receiver. This is accomplished as follows. 
The sample RTT, denoted SampleRTT, for a segment is the amount of time between 
when the segment is sent (that is, passed to IP) and when an acknowledgment for 
the segment is received. Instead of measuring a SampleRTT for every transmitted 
segment, most TCP implementations take only one SampleRTT measurement at 
a time. That is, at any point in time, the SampleRTT is being estimated for only 
one of the transmitted but currently unacknowledged segments, leading to a new 
value of SampleRTT approximately once every RTT. Also, TCP never computes a 
SampleRTT for a segment that has been retransmitted; it only measures 
SampleRTT for segments that have been transmitted once [Karn 1987]. (A problem 
at the end of the chapter asks you to consider why.)
Obviously, the SampleRTT values will fluctuate from segment to segment due 
to congestion in the routers and to the varying load on the end systems. Because of 
this fluctuation, any given SampleRTT value may be atypical. In order to estimate 

266         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
a typical RTT, it is therefore natural to take some sort of average of the SampleRTT 
values. TCP maintains an average, called EstimatedRTT, of the SampleRTT 
values. Upon obtaining a new SampleRTT, TCP updates EstimatedRTT accord-
ing to the following formula:
EstimatedRTT = (1 – α) # EstimatedRTT + α # SampleRTT
The formula above is written in the form of a programming-language state-
ment—the new value of EstimatedRTT is a weighted combination of the previous 
value of EstimatedRTT and the new value for SampleRTT. The recommended 
value of α is α = 0.125 (that is, 1/8) [RFC 6298], in which case the formula above 
becomes:
EstimatedRTT = 0.875 # EstimatedRTT + 0.125 # SampleRTT
Note that EstimatedRTT is a weighted average of the SampleRTT values. As 
discussed in a homework problem at the end of this chapter, this weighted average 
puts more weight on recent samples than on old samples. This is natural, as the more 
recent samples better reflect the current congestion in the network. In statistics, such 
an average is called an exponential weighted moving average (EWMA). The word 
“exponential” appears in EWMA because the weight of a given SampleRTT decays 
exponentially fast as the updates proceed. In the homework problems, you will be 
asked to derive the exponential term in EstimatedRTT.
Figure 3.32 shows the SampleRTT values and EstimatedRTT for a value 
of α = 1/8 for a TCP connection between gaia.cs.umass.edu (in Amherst, 
Massachusetts) to fantasia.eurecom.fr (in the south of France). Clearly, 
the variations in the SampleRTT are smoothed out in the computation of the 
EstimatedRTT.
In addition to having an estimate of the RTT, it is also valuable to have a meas-
ure of the variability of the RTT. [RFC 6298] defines the RTT variation, DevRTT, 
as an estimate of how much SampleRTT typically deviates from EstimatedRTT:
DevRTT = (1 – β) # DevRTT + β # | SampleRTT – EstimatedRTT |
Note that DevRTT is an EWMA of the difference between SampleRTT and 
EstimatedRTT. If the SampleRTT values have little fluctuation, then DevRTT 
will be small; on the other hand, if there is a lot of fluctuation, DevRTT will be large. 
The recommended value of β is 0.25.
Setting and Managing the Retransmission Timeout Interval
Given values of EstimatedRTT and DevRTT, what value should be used for 
TCP’s timeout interval? Clearly, the interval should be greater than or equal to 

3.5    •    Connection-Oriented Transport: TCP         267
EstimatedRTT, or unnecessary retransmissions would be sent. But the timeout 
interval should not be too much larger than EstimatedRTT; otherwise, when a 
segment is lost, TCP would not quickly retransmit the segment, leading to large 
data transfer delays. It is therefore desirable to set the timeout equal to the 
EstimatedRTT plus some margin. The margin should be large when there is a lot 
of fluctuation in the SampleRTT values; it should be small when there is little fluc-
tuation. The value of DevRTT should thus come into play here. All of these consid-
erations are taken into account in TCP’s method for determining the retransmission 
timeout interval:
TimeoutInterval = EstimatedRTT + 4 # DevRTT
An initial TimeoutInterval value of 1 second is recommended [RFC 
6298]. Also, when a timeout occurs, the value of TimeoutInterval is doubled 
to avoid a premature timeout occurring for a subsequent segment that will soon be 
acknowledged. However, as soon as a segment is received and EstimatedRTT is 
updated, the TimeoutInterval is again computed using the formula above.
TCP provides reliable data transfer by using positive acknowledgments and timers in much 
the same way that we studied in Section 3.4. TCP acknowledges data that has been 
received correctly, and it then retransmits segments when segments or their corresponding 
acknowledgments are thought to be lost or corrupted. Certain versions of TCP also have 
an implicit NAK mechanism—with TCP’s fast retransmit mechanism, the receipt of three 
duplicate ACKs for a given segment serves as an implicit NAK for the following segment, 
triggering retransmission of that segment before timeout. TCP uses sequences of numbers to 
allow the receiver to identify lost or duplicate segments. Just as in the case of our reliable 
data transfer protocol, rdt3.0, TCP cannot itself tell for certain if a segment, or its ACK, is 
lost, corrupted, or overly delayed. At the sender, TCP’s response will be the same: retrans-
mit the segment in question.
TCP also uses pipelining, allowing the sender to have multiple transmitted but yet-to-
be-acknowledged segments outstanding at any given time. We saw earlier that pipelining 
can greatly improve a session’s throughput when the ratio of the segment size to round-
trip delay is small. The specific number of outstanding, unacknowledged segments that a 
sender can have is determined by TCP’s flow-control and congestion-control mechanisms. 
TCP flow control is discussed at the end of this section; TCP congestion control is discussed 
in Section 3.7. For the time being, we must simply be aware that the TCP sender uses 
pipelining.
PRINCIPLES IN PRACTICE

268         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
3.5.4 Reliable Data Transfer
Recall that the Internet’s network-layer service (IP service) is unreliable. IP does 
not guarantee datagram delivery, does not guarantee in-order delivery of datagrams, 
and does not guarantee the integrity of the data in the datagrams. With IP service, 
datagrams can overflow router buffers and never reach their destination, datagrams 
can arrive out of order, and bits in the datagram can get corrupted (flipped from 0 to 
1 and vice versa). Because transport-layer segments are carried across the network 
by IP datagrams, transport-layer segments can suffer from these problems as well.
TCP creates a reliable data transfer service on top of IP’s unreliable best-
effort service. TCP’s reliable data transfer service ensures that the data stream that 
a process reads out of its TCP receive buffer is uncorrupted, without gaps, with-
out duplication, and in sequence; that is, the byte stream is exactly the same byte 
stream that was sent by the end system on the other side of the connection. How TCP 
provides a reliable data transfer involves many of the principles that we studied in 
Section 3.4.
In our earlier development of reliable data transfer techniques, it was conceptu-
ally easiest to assume that an individual timer is associated with each transmitted 
but not yet acknowledged segment. While this is great in theory, timer management 
can require considerable overhead. Thus, the recommended TCP timer management 
RTT (milliseconds)
150
200
250
300
350
100
1
8
15
22
29
36
43
50
Time (seconds)
Sample RTT
57
64
71
78
85
92
99
106
Estimated RTT
Figure 3.32  ♦  RTT samples and RTT estimates

3.5    •    Connection-Oriented Transport: TCP         269
procedures [RFC 6298] use only a single retransmission timer, even if there are mul-
tiple transmitted but not yet acknowledged segments. The TCP protocol described in 
this section follows this single-timer recommendation.
We will discuss how TCP provides reliable data transfer in two incremental 
steps. We first present a highly simplified description of a TCP sender that uses only 
timeouts to recover from lost segments; we then present a more complete description 
that uses duplicate acknowledgments in addition to timeouts. In the ensuing discus-
sion, we suppose that data is being sent in only one direction, from Host A to Host B, 
and that Host A is sending a large file.
Figure 3.33 presents a highly simplified description of a TCP sender. We see 
that there are three major events related to data transmission and retransmission 
in the TCP sender: data received from application above; timer timeout; and ACK 
/* Assume sender is not constrained by TCP ﬂow or congestion control, that data from above is less
than MSS in size, and that data transfer is in one direction only. */
NextSeqNum=InitialSeqNumber
SendBase=InitialSeqNumber
loop (forever) {
switch(event)
event: data received from application above
create TCP segment with sequence number NextSeqNum
if (timer currently not running)
start timer
pass segment to IP
NextSeqNum=NextSeqNum+length(data)
break;
event: timer timeout
retransmit not-yet-acknowledged segment with
smallest sequence number
start timer
break;
event: ACK received, with ACK ﬁeld value of y
if (y > SendBase) {
SendBase=y
if (there are currently any not-yet-acknowledged segments)
start timer
}
break;
} /* end of loop forever */
Figure 3.33  ♦  Simplified TCP sender

270         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
receipt. Upon the occurrence of the first major event, TCP receives data from the 
application, encapsulates the data in a segment, and passes the segment to IP. Note 
that each segment includes a sequence number that is the byte-stream number of 
the first data byte in the segment, as described in Section 3.5.2. Also note that if the 
timer is already not running for some other segment, TCP starts the timer when the 
segment is passed to IP. (It is helpful to think of the timer as being associated with 
the oldest unacknowledged segment.) The expiration interval for this timer is the 
TimeoutInterval, which is calculated from EstimatedRTT and DevRTT, as 
described in Section 3.5.3.
The second major event is the timeout. TCP responds to the timeout event by 
retransmitting the segment that caused the timeout. TCP then restarts the timer.
The third major event that must be handled by the TCP sender is the arrival of 
an acknowledgment segment (ACK) from the receiver (more specifically, a segment 
containing a valid ACK field value). On the occurrence of this event, TCP compares 
the ACK value y with its variable SendBase. The TCP state variable SendBase 
is the sequence number of the oldest unacknowledged byte. (Thus SendBase–1 is 
the sequence number of the last byte that is known to have been received correctly 
and in order at the receiver.) As indicated earlier, TCP uses cumulative acknowl-
edgments, so that y acknowledges the receipt of all bytes before byte number y. If 
y > SendBase, then the ACK is acknowledging one or more previously unac-
knowledged segments. Thus the sender updates its SendBase variable; it also 
restarts the timer if there currently are any not-yet-acknowledged segments.
A Few Interesting Scenarios
We have just described a highly simplified version of how TCP provides reliable data 
transfer. But even this highly simplified version has many subtleties. To get a good 
feeling for how this protocol works, let’s now walk through a few simple scenarios. 
Figure 3.34 depicts the first scenario, in which Host A sends one segment to Host B. 
Suppose that this segment has sequence number 92 and contains 8 bytes of data. After 
sending this segment, Host A waits for a segment from B with acknowledgment num-
ber 100. Although the segment from A is received at B, the acknowledgment from B 
to A gets lost. In this case, the timeout event occurs, and Host A retransmits the same 
segment. Of course, when Host B receives the retransmission, it observes from the 
sequence number that the segment contains data that has already been received. Thus, 
TCP in Host B will discard the bytes in the retransmitted segment.
In a second scenario, shown in Figure 3.35, Host A sends two segments back to 
back. The first segment has sequence number 92 and 8 bytes of data, and the second 
segment has sequence number 100 and 20 bytes of data. Suppose that both segments 
arrive intact at B, and B sends two separate acknowledgments for each of these seg-
ments. The first of these acknowledgments has acknowledgment number 100; the 
second has acknowledgment number 120. Suppose now that neither of the acknowl-
edgments arrives at Host A before the timeout. When the timeout event occurs, Host 

3.5    •    Connection-Oriented Transport: TCP         271
A resends the first segment with sequence number 92 and restarts the timer. As long 
as the ACK for the second segment arrives before the new timeout, the second seg-
ment will not be retransmitted.
In a third and final scenario, suppose Host A sends the two segments, exactly 
as in the second example. The acknowledgment of the first segment is lost in the 
network, but just before the timeout event, Host A receives an acknowledgment with 
acknowledgment number 120. Host A therefore knows that Host B has received 
everything up through byte 119; so Host A does not resend either of the two 
segments. This scenario is illustrated in Figure 3.36.
Doubling the Timeout Interval
We now discuss a few modifications that most TCP implementations employ. The 
first concerns the length of the timeout interval after a timer expiration. In this modi-
fication, whenever the timeout event occurs, TCP retransmits the not-yet-acknowl-
edged segment with the smallest sequence number, as described above. But each 
time TCP retransmits, it sets the next timeout interval to twice the previous value, 
Time
Time
Host A
Host B
Timeout
Seq=92, 8 bytes data
Seq=92, 8 bytes data
ACK=100
ACK=100
X
(loss)
Figure 3.34  ♦  Retransmission due to a lost acknowledgment

272         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
rather than deriving it from the last EstimatedRTT and DevRTT (as described 
in Section 3.5.3). For example, suppose TimeoutInterval associated with 
the oldest not yet acknowledged segment is .75 sec when the timer first expires. 
TCP will then retransmit this segment and set the new expiration time to 1.5 sec. If 
the timer expires again 1.5 sec later, TCP will again retransmit this segment, now 
setting the expiration time to 3.0 sec. Thus, the intervals grow exponentially after 
each retransmission. However, whenever the timer is started after either of the two 
other events (that is, data received from application above, and ACK received), the 
TimeoutInterval is derived from the most recent values of EstimatedRTT 
and DevRTT.
This modification provides a limited form of congestion control. (More com-
prehensive forms of TCP congestion control will be studied in Section 3.7.) The 
timer expiration is most likely caused by congestion in the network, that is, too many 
packets arriving at one (or more) router queues in the path between the source and 
destination, causing packets to be dropped and/or long queuing delays. In times of 
congestion, if the sources continue to retransmit packets persistently, the congestion 
Time
Time
Host A
Host B
seq=92 timeout interval
Seq=92, 8 bytes data
Seq=100, 20 bytes data
ACK=100
ACK=120
ACK=120
seq=92 timeout interval
Seq=92, 8 bytes data
Figure 3.35  ♦  Segment 100 not retransmitted

3.5    •    Connection-Oriented Transport: TCP         273
may get worse. Instead, TCP acts more politely, with each sender retransmitting after 
longer and longer intervals. We will see that a similar idea is used by Ethernet when 
we study CSMA/CD in Chapter 6.
Fast Retransmit
One of the problems with timeout-triggered retransmissions is that the timeout period 
can be relatively long. When a segment is lost, this long timeout period forces the 
sender to delay resending the lost packet, thereby increasing the end-to-end delay. 
Fortunately, the sender can often detect packet loss well before the timeout event 
occurs by noting so-called duplicate ACKs. A duplicate ACK is an ACK that reac-
knowledges a segment for which the sender has already received an earlier acknowl-
edgment. To understand the sender’s response to a duplicate ACK, we must look at 
why the receiver sends a duplicate ACK in the first place. Table 3.2 summarizes the 
TCP receiver’s ACK generation policy [RFC 5681]. When a TCP receiver receives 
Time
Time
Host A
Host B
Seq=92 timeout interval
Seq=92, 8 bytes data
Seq=100,  20 bytes data
ACK=100
ACK=120
X
(loss)
Figure 3.36  ♦  A cumulative acknowledgment avoids retransmission of the 
first segment

274         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
a segment with a sequence number that is larger than the next, expected, in-order 
sequence number, it detects a gap in the data stream—that is, a missing segment. 
This gap could be the result of lost or reordered segments within the network. Since 
TCP does not use negative acknowledgments, the receiver cannot send an explicit 
negative acknowledgment back to the sender. Instead, it simply reacknowledges 
(that is, generates a duplicate ACK for) the last in-order byte of data it has received. 
(Note that Table 3.2 allows for the case that the receiver does not discard out-of-
order segments.)
Because a sender often sends a large number of segments back to back, if one 
segment is lost, there will likely be many back-to-back duplicate ACKs. If the TCP 
sender receives three duplicate ACKs for the same data, it takes this as an indication 
that the segment following the segment that has been ACKed three times has been 
lost. (In the homework problems, we consider the question of why the sender waits 
for three duplicate ACKs, rather than just a single duplicate ACK.) In the case that 
three duplicate ACKs are received, the TCP sender performs a fast retransmit [RFC 
5681], retransmitting the missing segment before that segment’s timer expires. This 
is shown in Figure 3.37, where the second segment is lost, then retransmitted before 
its timer expires. For TCP with fast retransmit, the following code snippet replaces 
the ACK received event in Figure 3.33:
event: ACK received, with ACK field value of y
            if (y > SendBase) {
            SendBase=y
            if (there are currently any not yet
                       acknowledged segments)
               start timer
               }
Table 3.2  ♦  TCP ACK Generation Recommendation [RFC 5681]
Event
TCP Receiver Action
Arrival of in-order segment with expected sequence number. All  
data up to expected sequence number already acknowledged.
Delayed ACK. Wait up to 500 msec for arrival of another in-order segment.  
If next in-order segment does not arrive in this interval, send an ACK.
Arrival of in-order segment with expected sequence number. One  
other in-order segment waiting for ACK transmission.
Immediately send single cumulative ACK, ACKing both in-order segments.
Arrival of out-of-order segment with higher-than-expected sequence 
number. Gap detected.
Immediately send duplicate ACK, indicating sequence number of next 
expected byte (which is the lower end of the gap).
Arrival of segment that partially or completely fills in gap in  
received data.
Immediately send ACK, provided that segment starts at the lower end  
of gap.

3.5    •    Connection-Oriented Transport: TCP         275
Host A
Host B
seq=100, 20 bytes of data
Timeout
Time
Time
X
seq=100, 20 bytes of data
seq=92, 8 bytes of data
seq=120, 15 bytes of data
seq=135, 6 bytes of data
seq=141, 16 bytes of data
ack=100
ack=100
ack=100
ack=100
Figure 3.37  ♦  Fast retransmit: retransmitting the missing segment before 
the segment’s timer expires
            else {/* a duplicate ACK for already ACKed
                   segment */
               increment number of duplicate ACKs
                   received for y
               if (number of duplicate ACKS received
                   for y==3)
                   /* TCP fast retransmit */
                   resend segment with sequence number y
               }
           break;
We noted earlier that many subtle issues arise when a timeout/retransmit mech-
anism is implemented in an actual protocol such as TCP. The procedures above, 
which have evolved as a result of more than 30 years of experience with TCP timers, 
should convince you that this is indeed the case!

276         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
Go-Back-N or Selective Repeat?
Let us close our study of TCP’s error-recovery mechanism by considering the fol-
lowing question: Is TCP a GBN or an SR protocol? Recall that TCP acknowledg-
ments are cumulative and correctly received but out-of-order segments are not 
individually ACKed by the receiver. Consequently, as shown in Figure 3.33 (see 
also Figure 3.19), the TCP sender need only maintain the smallest sequence number 
of a transmitted but unacknowledged byte (SendBase) and the sequence number 
of the next byte to be sent (NextSeqNum). In this sense, TCP looks a lot like a 
GBN-style protocol. But there are some striking differences between TCP and Go-
Back-N. Many TCP implementations will buffer correctly received but out-of-order 
segments [Stevens 1994]. Consider also what happens when the sender sends a 
sequence of segments 1, 2, . . . , N, and all of the segments arrive in order without 
error at the receiver. Further suppose that the acknowledgment for packet n 6 N 
gets lost, but the remaining N - 1 acknowledgments arrive at the sender before 
their respective timeouts. In this example, GBN would retransmit not only packet n, 
but also all of the subsequent packets n + 1, n + 2, . . . , N. TCP, on the other hand, 
would retransmit at most one segment, namely, segment n. Moreover, TCP would 
not even retransmit segment n if the acknowledgment for segment n + 1 arrived 
before the timeout for segment n.
A proposed modification to TCP, the so-called selective acknowledgment  
[RFC 2018], allows a TCP receiver to acknowledge out-of-order segments selectively 
rather than just cumulatively acknowledging the last correctly received, in-order 
segment. When combined with selective retransmission—skipping the retransmis-
sion of segments that have already been selectively acknowledged by the receiver—
TCP looks a lot like our generic SR protocol. Thus, TCP’s error-recovery mechanism 
is probably best categorized as a hybrid of GBN and SR protocols.
3.5.5 Flow Control
Recall that the hosts on each side of a TCP connection set aside a receive buffer 
for the connection. When the TCP connection receives bytes that are correct and in 
sequence, it places the data in the receive buffer. The associated application process 
will read data from this buffer, but not necessarily at the instant the data arrives. 
Indeed, the receiving application may be busy with some other task and may not even 
attempt to read the data until long after it has arrived. If the application is relatively 
slow at reading the data, the sender can very easily overflow the connection’s receive 
buffer by sending too much data too quickly.
TCP provides a flow-control service to its applications to eliminate the pos-
sibility of the sender overflowing the receiver’s buffer. Flow control is thus a speed-
matching service—matching the rate at which the sender is sending against the rate 
at which the receiving application is reading. As noted earlier, a TCP sender can also 
be throttled due to congestion within the IP network; this form of sender control is 

3.5    •    Connection-Oriented Transport: TCP         277
referred to as congestion control, a topic we will explore in detail in Sections 3.6 
and 3.7. Even though the actions taken by flow and congestion control are similar 
(the throttling of the sender), they are obviously taken for very different reasons. 
Unfortunately, many authors use the terms interchangeably, and the savvy reader 
would be wise to distinguish between them. Let’s now discuss how TCP provides its 
flow-control service. In order to see the forest for the trees, we suppose throughout 
this section that the TCP implementation is such that the TCP receiver discards out-
of-order segments.
TCP provides flow control by having the sender maintain a variable called 
the receive window. Informally, the receive window is used to give the sender an 
idea of how much free buffer space is available at the receiver. Because TCP is 
full-duplex, the sender at each side of the connection maintains a distinct receive 
window. Let’s investigate the receive window in the context of a file transfer. Sup-
pose that Host A is sending a large file to Host B over a TCP connection. Host B 
allocates a receive buffer to this connection; denote its size by RcvBuffer. From 
time to time, the application process in Host B reads from the buffer. Define the 
following variables:
•	 LastByteRead: the number of the last byte in the data stream read from the 
buffer by the application process in B
•	 LastByteRcvd: the number of the last byte in the data stream that has arrived 
from the network and has been placed in the receive buffer at B
Because TCP is not permitted to overflow the allocated buffer, we must have
LastByteRcvd – LastByteRead … RcvBuffer
The receive window, denoted rwnd is set to the amount of spare room in the buffer:
rwnd = RcvBuffer – [LastByteRcvd – LastByteRead]
Because the spare room changes with time, rwnd is dynamic. The variable rwnd is 
illustrated in Figure 3.38.
How does the connection use the variable rwnd to provide the flow-control 
service? Host B tells Host A how much spare room it has in the connection buffer 
by placing its current value of rwnd in the receive window field of every segment it 
sends to A. Initially, Host B sets rwnd = RcvBuffer. Note that to pull this off, 
Host B must keep track of several connection-specific variables.
Host A in turn keeps track of two variables, LastByteSent and Last-
ByteAcked, which have obvious meanings. Note that the difference between these 
two variables, LastByteSent – LastByteAcked, is the amount of unac-
knowledged data that A has sent into the connection. By keeping the amount of 
unacknowledged data less than the value of rwnd, Host A is assured that it is not 

278         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
overflowing the receive buffer at Host B. Thus, Host A makes sure throughout the 
connection’s life that
LastByteSent – LastByteAcked … rwnd
There is one minor technical problem with this scheme. To see this, suppose Host 
B’s receive buffer becomes full so that rwnd = 0. After advertising rwnd = 0 to 
Host A, also suppose that B has nothing to send to A. Now consider what happens. 
As the application process at B empties the buffer, TCP does not send new seg-
ments with new rwnd values to Host A; indeed, TCP sends a segment to Host A 
only if it has data to send or if it has an acknowledgment to send. Therefore, Host 
A is never informed that some space has opened up in Host B’s receive buffer—
Host A is blocked and can transmit no more data! To solve this problem, the TCP 
specification requires Host A to continue to send segments with one data byte when 
B’s receive window is zero. These segments will be acknowledged by the receiver. 
Eventually the buffer will begin to empty and the acknowledgments will contain a 
nonzero rwnd value.
The online site at for this book provides an interactive animation that illustrates 
the operation of the TCP receive window.
Having described TCP’s flow-control service, we briefly mention here that UDP 
does not provide flow control and consequently, segments may be lost at the receiver 
due to buffer overflow. For example, consider sending a series of UDP segments 
from a process on Host A to a process on Host B. For a typical UDP implementation, 
UDP will append the segments in a finite-sized buffer that “precedes” the corre-
sponding socket (that is, the door to the process). The process reads one entire seg-
ment at a time from the buffer. If the process does not read the segments fast enough 
from the buffer, the buffer will overflow and segments will get dropped.
Application
process 
Data
from IP
TCP data
in buffer
rwnd
RcvBuﬀer
Spare room
Figure 3.38  ♦  The receive window (rwnd) and the receive buffer 
(RcvBuffer)

3.5    •    Connection-Oriented Transport: TCP         279
3.5.6 TCP Connection Management
In this subsection, we take a closer look at how a TCP connection is established and 
torn down. Although this topic may not seem particularly thrilling, it is important 
because TCP connection establishment can significantly add to perceived delays (for 
example, when surfing the Web). Furthermore, many of the most common network 
attacks—including the incredibly popular SYN flood attack (see sidebar on the SYN 
flood attack)—exploit vulnerabilities in TCP connection management. Let’s first 
take a look at how a TCP connection is established. Suppose a process running in 
one host (client) wants to initiate a connection with another process in another host 
(server). The client application process first informs the client TCP that it wants to 
establish a connection to a process in the server. The TCP in the client then proceeds 
to establish a TCP connection with the TCP in the server in the following manner:
•	 Step 1. The client-side TCP first sends a special TCP segment to the server-side 
TCP. This special segment contains no application-layer data. But one of the flag 
bits in the segment’s header (see Figure 3.29), the SYN bit, is set to 1. For this 
reason, this special segment is referred to as a SYN segment. In addition, the cli-
ent randomly chooses an initial sequence number (client_isn) and puts this 
number in the sequence number field of the initial TCP SYN segment. This seg-
ment is encapsulated within an IP datagram and sent to the server. There has been 
considerable interest in properly randomizing the choice of the client_isn in 
order to avoid certain security attacks [CERT 2001–09; RFC 4987].
•	 Step 2. Once the IP datagram containing the TCP SYN segment arrives at the 
server host (assuming it does arrive!), the server extracts the TCP SYN segment 
from the datagram, allocates the TCP buffers and variables to the connection, 
and sends a connection-granted segment to the client TCP. (We’ll see in Chapter 
8 that the allocation of these buffers and variables before completing the third 
step of the three-way handshake makes TCP vulnerable to a denial-of-service 
attack known as SYN flooding.) This connection-granted segment also contains 
no application-layer data. However, it does contain three important pieces of 
information in the segment header. First, the SYN bit is set to 1. Second, the 
acknowledgment field of the TCP segment header is set to client_isn+1. 
Finally, the server chooses its own initial sequence number (server_isn) and 
puts this value in the sequence number field of the TCP segment header. This 
connection-granted segment is saying, in effect, “I received your SYN packet to 
start a connection with your initial sequence number, client_isn. I agree to 
establish this connection. My own initial sequence number is server_isn.” 
The connection-granted segment is referred to as a SYNACK segment.
•	 Step 3. Upon receiving the SYNACK segment, the client also allocates buffers 
and variables to the connection. The client host then sends the server yet another 
segment; this last segment acknowledges the server’s connection-granted segment 
(the client does so by putting the value server_isn+1 in the acknowledgment 

280         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
field of the TCP segment header). The SYN bit is set to zero, since the connection 
is established. This third stage of the three-way handshake may carry client-to-
server data in the segment payload.
Once these three steps have been completed, the client and server hosts can send 
segments containing data to each other. In each of these future segments, the SYN 
bit will be set to zero. Note that in order to establish the connection, three packets 
are sent between the two hosts, as illustrated in Figure 3.39. For this reason, this 
connection-establishment procedure is often referred to as a three-way handshake. 
Several aspects of the TCP three-way handshake are explored in the homework prob-
lems (Why are initial sequence numbers needed? Why is a three-way handshake, 
as opposed to a two-way handshake, needed?). It’s interesting to note that a rock 
climber and a belayer (who is stationed below the rock climber and whose job it is 
to handle the climber’s safety rope) use a three-way-handshake communication pro-
tocol that is identical to TCP’s to ensure that both sides are ready before the climber 
begins ascent.
All good things must come to an end, and the same is true with a TCP connec-
tion. Either of the two processes participating in a TCP connection can end the con-
nection. When a connection ends, the “resources” (that is, the buffers and variables) 
Time
Time
Client host
Connection
request
Connection
granted
Server host
SYN=1, seq=client_isn
SYN=1, seq=server_isn,
ack=client_isn+1
SYN=0, seq=client_isn+1,
ack=server_isn+1
ACK
Figure 3.39  ♦  TCP three-way handshake: segment exchange

3.5    •    Connection-Oriented Transport: TCP         281
in the hosts are deallocated. As an example, suppose the client decides to close the 
connection, as shown in Figure 3.40. The client application process issues a close 
command. This causes the client TCP to send a special TCP segment to the server 
process. This special segment has a flag bit in the segment’s header, the FIN bit (see 
Figure 3.29), set to 1. When the server receives this segment, it sends the client an 
acknowledgment segment in return. The server then sends its own shutdown segment, 
which has the FIN bit set to 1. Finally, the client acknowledges the server’s shutdown 
segment. At this point, all the resources in the two hosts are now deallocated.
During the life of a TCP connection, the TCP protocol running in each host 
makes transitions through various TCP states. Figure 3.41 illustrates a typical 
sequence of TCP states that are visited by the client TCP. The client TCP begins 
in the CLOSED state. The application on the client side initiates a new TCP con-
nection (by creating a Socket object in our Python examples from Chapter 2). This 
causes TCP in the client to send a SYN segment to TCP in the server. After hav-
ing sent the SYN segment, the client TCP enters the SYN_SENT state. While in 
the SYN_SENT state, the client TCP waits for a segment from the server TCP that 
includes an acknowledgment for the client’s previous segment and has the SYN bit 
Time
Time
Client
Close
Close
Server
FIN
ACK
ACK
FIN
Closed
Timed wait
Figure 3.40  ♦  Closing a TCP connection

282         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
set to 1. Having received such a segment, the client TCP enters the ESTABLISHED 
state. While in the ESTABLISHED state, the TCP client can send and receive TCP 
segments containing payload (that is, application-generated) data.
Suppose that the client application decides it wants to close the connection. (Note 
that the server could also choose to close the connection.) This causes the client TCP 
to send a TCP segment with the FIN bit set to 1 and to enter the FIN_WAIT_1 state. 
While in the FIN_WAIT_1 state, the client TCP waits for a TCP segment from the 
server with an acknowledgment. When it receives this segment, the client TCP enters 
the FIN_WAIT_2 state. While in the FIN_WAIT_2 state, the client waits for another 
segment from the server with the FIN bit set to 1; after receiving this segment, the client 
TCP acknowledges the server’s segment and enters the TIME_WAIT state. The TIME_
WAIT state lets the TCP client resend the final acknowledgment in case the ACK is 
lost. The time spent in the TIME_WAIT state is implementation-dependent, but typical 
values are 30 seconds, 1 minute, and 2 minutes. After the wait, the connection formally 
closes and all resources on the client side (including port numbers) are released.
Figure 3.42 illustrates the series of states typically visited by the server-side 
TCP, assuming the client begins connection teardown. The transitions are self-
explanatory. In these two state-transition diagrams, we have only shown how a TCP 
connection is normally established and shut down. We have not described what hap-
pens in certain pathological scenarios, for example, when both sides of a connection 
want to initiate or shut down at the same time. If you are interested in learning about 
CLOSED
SYN_SENT
ESTABLISHED
FIN_WAIT_1
FIN_WAIT_2
TIME_WAIT
Send SYN
Send FIN
Receive ACK, 
send nothing
Wait 30 seconds
Receive FIN, 
send ACK
Receive SYN & ACK, 
send ACK
Client application
initiates a TCP connection
Client application
initiates close connection
Figure 3.41  ♦  A typical sequence of TCP states visited by a client TCP

3.5    •    Connection-Oriented Transport: TCP         283
this and other advanced issues concerning TCP, you are encouraged to see Stevens’ 
comprehensive book [Stevens 1994].
Our discussion above has assumed that both the client and server are prepared to 
communicate, that is, that the server is listening on the port to which the client sends 
its SYN segment. Let’s consider what happens when a host receives a TCP segment 
whose port numbers or source IP address do not match with any of the ongoing sock-
ets in the host. For example, suppose a host receives a TCP SYN packet with desti-
nation port 80, but the host is not accepting connections on port 80 (that is, it is not 
running a Web server on port 80). Then the host will send a special reset segment to 
the source. This TCP segment has the RST flag bit (see Section 3.5.2) set to 1. Thus, 
when a host sends a reset segment, it is telling the source “I don’t have a socket for 
that segment. Please do not resend the segment.” When a host receives a UDP packet 
whose destination port number doesn’t match with an ongoing UDP socket, the host 
sends a special ICMP datagram, as discussed in Chapter 5.
Now that we have a good understanding of TCP connection management, let’s 
revisit the nmap port-scanning tool and examine more closely how it works. To explore 
a specific TCP port, say port 6789, on a target host, nmap will send a TCP SYN seg-
ment with destination port 6789 to that host. There are three possible outcomes:
•	 The source host receives a TCP SYNACK segment from the target host. Since this 
means that an application is running with TCP port 6789 on the target post, nmap 
returns “open.”
CLOSED
LISTEN
SYN_RCVD
ESTABLISHED
CLOSE_WAIT
LAST_ACK
Receive FIN,
send ACK
Receive ACK, 
send nothing
Send FIN
Receive SYN 
send SYN & ACK
Server application
creates a listen socket
Receive ACK, 
send nothing
Figure 3.42  ♦  A typical sequence of TCP states visited by a server-side TCP

284         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
THE SYN FLOOD ATTACK
We’ve seen in our discussion of TCP’s three-way handshake that a server allocates 
and initializes connection variables and buffers in response to a received SYN. The 
server then sends a SYNACK in response, and awaits an ACK segment from the cli-
ent. If the client does not send an ACK to complete the third step of this 3-way hand-
shake, eventually (often after a minute or more) the server will terminate the half-open 
connection and reclaim the allocated resources.
This TCP connection management protocol sets the stage for a classic Denial of 
Service (DoS) attack known as the SYN flood attack. In this attack, the attacker(s) send 
a large number of TCP SYN segments, without completing the third handshake step. With 
this deluge of SYN segments, the server’s connection resources become exhausted as 
they are allocated (but never used!) for half-open connections; legitimate clients are then 
denied service. Such SYN flooding attacks were among the first documented DoS attacks 
[CERT SYN 1996]. Fortunately, an effective defense known as SYN cookies [RFC 
4987] are now deployed in most major operating systems. SYN cookies work as follows:
•	
When the server receives a SYN segment, it does not know if the segment is 
coming from a legitimate user or is part of a SYN flood attack. So, instead of 
creating a half-open TCP connection for this SYN, the server creates an initial 
TCP sequence number that is a complicated function (hash function) of source 
and destination IP addresses and port numbers of the SYN segment, as well as 
a secret number only known to the server. This carefully crafted initial sequence 
number is the so-called “cookie.” The server then sends the client a SYNACK 
packet with this special initial sequence number. Importantly, the server does not 
remember the cookie or any other state information corresponding to the SYN.
•	
A legitimate client will return an ACK segment. When the server receives this 
ACK, it must verify that the ACK corresponds to some SYN sent earlier. But how 
is this done if the server maintains no memory about SYN segments? As you may 
have guessed, it is done with the cookie. Recall that for a legitimate ACK, the 
value in the acknowledgment field is equal to the initial sequence number in the 
SYNACK (the cookie value in this case) plus one (see Figure 3.39). The server 
can then run the same hash function using the source and destination IP address 
and port numbers in the SYNACK (which are the same as in the original SYN) 
and the secret number. If the result of the function plus one is the same as the 
acknowledgment (cookie) value in the client’s SYNACK, the server concludes that 
the ACK corresponds to an earlier SYN segment and is hence valid. The server 
then creates a fully open connection along with a socket.
•	
On the other hand, if the client does not return an ACK segment, then the origi-
nal SYN has done no harm at the server, since the server hasn’t yet allocated 
any resources in response to the original bogus SYN.
FOCUS ON SECURITY

3.6    •    Principles of Congestion Control         285
•	 The source host receives a TCP RST segment from the target host. This means 
that the SYN segment reached the target host, but the target host is not running 
an application with TCP port 6789. But the attacker at least knows that the seg-
ments destined to the host at port 6789 are not blocked by any firewall on the path 
between source and target hosts. (Firewalls are discussed in Chapter 8.)
•	 The source receives nothing. This likely means that the SYN segment was blocked 
by an intervening firewall and never reached the target host.
Nmap is a powerful tool that can “case the joint” not only for open TCP ports, 
but also for open UDP ports, for firewalls and their configurations, and even for 
the versions of applications and operating systems. Most of this is done by manip-
ulating TCP connection-management segments. You can download nmap from 
www.nmap.org.
This completes our introduction to error control and flow control in TCP. In 
Section 3.7, we’ll return to TCP and look at TCP congestion control in some depth. 
Before doing so, however, we first step back and examine congestion-control issues 
in a broader context.
3.6	 Principles of Congestion Control
In the previous sections, we examined both the general principles and specific TCP 
mechanisms used to provide for a reliable data transfer service in the face of packet 
loss. We mentioned earlier that, in practice, such loss typically results from the over-
flowing of router buffers as the network becomes congested. Packet retransmission 
thus treats a symptom of network congestion (the loss of a specific transport-layer 
segment) but does not treat the cause of network congestion—too many sources 
attempting to send data at too high a rate. To treat the cause of network congestion, 
mechanisms are needed to throttle senders in the face of network congestion.
In this section, we consider the problem of congestion control in a general con-
text, seeking to understand why congestion is a bad thing, how network congestion 
is manifested in the performance received by upper-layer applications, and various 
approaches that can be taken to avoid, or react to, network congestion. This more 
general study of congestion control is appropriate since, as with reliable data trans-
fer, it is high on our “top-ten” list of fundamentally important problems in network-
ing. The following section contains a detailed study of TCP’s congestion-control 
algorithm.
3.6.1 The Causes and the Costs of Congestion
Let’s begin our general study of congestion control by examining three increas-
ingly complex scenarios in which congestion occurs. In each case, we’ll look at why 

286         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
congestion occurs in the first place and at the cost of congestion (in terms of resources 
not fully utilized and poor performance received by the end systems). We’ll not (yet) 
focus on how to react to, or avoid, congestion but rather focus on the simpler issue of 
understanding what happens as hosts increase their transmission rate and the network 
becomes congested.
Scenario 1: Two Senders, a Router with Infinite Buffers
We begin by considering perhaps the simplest congestion scenario possible: Two 
hosts (A and B) each have a connection that shares a single hop between source and 
destination, as shown in Figure 3.43.
Let’s assume that the application in Host A is sending data into the connection 
(for example, passing data to the transport-level protocol via a socket) at an average 
rate of lin bytes/sec. These data are original in the sense that each unit of data is sent 
into the socket only once. The underlying transport-level protocol is a simple one. 
Data is encapsulated and sent; no error recovery (e.g., retransmission), flow control, 
or congestion control is performed. Ignoring the additional overhead due to adding 
transport- and lower-layer header information, the rate at which Host A offers traffic 
to the router in this first scenario is thus lin bytes/sec. Host B operates in a similar 
manner, and we assume for simplicity that it too is sending at a rate of lin bytes/sec. 
Packets from Hosts A and B pass through a router and over a shared outgoing link 
of capacity R. The router has buffers that allow it to store incoming packets when 
the packet-arrival rate exceeds the outgoing link’s capacity. In this first scenario, we 
assume that the router has an infinite amount of buffer space.
Figure 3.44 plots the performance of Host A’s connection under this first sce-
nario. The left graph plots the per-connection throughput (number of bytes per 
Host B
Unlimited shared
output link buffers
lin: original data
Host A
Host D
Host C
lout 
Figure 3.43  ♦  Congestion scenario 1: Two connections sharing a single 
hop with infinite buffers

3.6    •    Principles of Congestion Control         287
second at the receiver) as a function of the connection-sending rate. For a sending 
rate between 0 and R/2, the throughput at the receiver equals the sender’s sending 
rate—everything sent by the sender is received at the receiver with a finite delay. 
When the sending rate is above R/2, however, the throughput is only R/2. This upper 
limit on throughput is a consequence of the sharing of link capacity between two 
connections. The link simply cannot deliver packets to a receiver at a steady-state 
rate that exceeds R/2. No matter how high Hosts A and B set their sending rates, they 
will each never see a throughput higher than R/2.
Achieving a per-connection throughput of R/2 might actually appear to be a good 
thing, because the link is fully utilized in delivering packets to their destinations. The 
right-hand graph in Figure 3.44, however, shows the consequence of operating near link 
capacity. As the sending rate approaches R/2 (from the left), the average delay becomes 
larger and larger. When the sending rate exceeds R/2, the average number of queued 
packets in the router is unbounded, and the average delay between source and destina-
tion becomes infinite (assuming that the connections operate at these sending rates for 
an infinite period of time and there is an infinite amount of buffering available). Thus, 
while operating at an aggregate throughput of near R may be ideal from a throughput 
standpoint, it is far from ideal from a delay standpoint. Even in this (extremely) ideal-
ized scenario, we’ve already found one cost of a congested network—large queuing 
delays are experienced as the packet-arrival rate nears the link capacity.
Scenario 2: Two Senders and a Router with Finite Buffers
Let’s now slightly modify scenario 1 in the following two ways (see Figure 3.45). 
First, the amount of router buffering is assumed to be finite. A consequence of this 
real-world assumption is that packets will be dropped when arriving to an already-
full buffer. Second, we assume that each connection is reliable. If a packet containing 
R/2
R/2
Delay
R/2
lin
lin
lout
a.
b.
Figure 3.44  ♦  Congestion scenario 1: Throughput and delay as a function 
of host sending rate

288         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
a transport-level segment is dropped at the router, the sender will eventually retrans-
mit it. Because packets can be retransmitted, we must now be more careful with our 
use of the term sending rate. Specifically, let us again denote the rate at which the 
application sends original data into the socket by lin bytes/sec. The rate at which the 
transport layer sends segments (containing original data and retransmitted data) into 
the network will be denoted l′in bytes/sec. l′in is sometimes referred to as the offered 
load to the network.
The performance realized under scenario 2 will now depend strongly on how 
retransmission is performed. First, consider the unrealistic case that Host A is able 
to somehow (magically!) determine whether or not a buffer is free in the router and 
thus sends a packet only when a buffer is free. In this case, no loss would occur, lin 
would be equal to l′in, and the throughput of the connection would be equal to lin. 
This case is shown in Figure 3.46(a). From a throughput standpoint, performance 
is ideal—everything that is sent is received. Note that the average host sending rate 
cannot exceed R/2 under this scenario, since packet loss is assumed never to occur.
Consider next the slightly more realistic case that the sender retransmits only 
when a packet is known for certain to be lost. (Again, this assumption is a bit of 
a stretch. However, it is possible that the sending host might set its timeout large 
enough to be virtually assured that a packet that has not been acknowledged has been 
lost.) In this case, the performance might look something like that shown in Fig-
ure 3.46(b). To appreciate what is happening here, consider the case that the offered 
load, l′in (the rate of original data transmission plus retransmissions), equals R/2. 
According to Figure 3.46(b), at this value of the offered load, the rate at which data 
Finite shared output
link buffers
Host B
Host A
Host D
Host C
lout 
lin: original data
l’in: original data, plus
retransmitted data
Figure 3.45  ♦  Scenario 2: Two hosts (with retransmissions) and a router 
with finite buffers

3.6    •    Principles of Congestion Control         289
are delivered to the receiver application is R/3. Thus, out of the 0.5R units of data 
transmitted, 0.333R bytes/sec (on average) are original data and 0.166R bytes/sec (on 
average) are retransmitted data. We see here another cost of a congested network—
the sender must perform retransmissions in order to compensate for dropped (lost) 
packets due to buffer overflow.
Finally, let us consider the case that the sender may time out prematurely and 
retransmit a packet that has been delayed in the queue but not yet lost. In this case, 
both the original data packet and the retransmission may reach the receiver. Of 
course, the receiver needs but one copy of this packet and will discard the retrans-
mission. In this case, the work done by the router in forwarding the retransmitted 
copy of the original packet was wasted, as the receiver will have already received 
the original copy of this packet. The router would have better used the link trans-
mission capacity to send a different packet instead. Here then is yet another cost of 
a congested network—unneeded retransmissions by the sender in the face of large 
delays may cause a router to use its link bandwidth to forward unneeded copies of a 
packet. Figure 3.46 (c) shows the throughput versus offered load when each packet 
is assumed to be forwarded (on average) twice by the router. Since each packet is 
forwarded twice, the throughput will have an asymptotic value of R/4 as the offered 
load approaches R/2.
Scenario 3: Four Senders, Routers with Finite Buffers, and  
Multihop Paths
In our final congestion scenario, four hosts transmit packets, each over overlap-
ping two-hop paths, as shown in Figure 3.47. We again assume that each host uses 
a timeout/retransmission mechanism to implement a reliable data transfer service, 
that all hosts have the same value of lin, and that all router links have capacity 
R bytes/sec.
R/2
R/2
R/2
lout
a.
b.
R/2
lout
R/3
R/2
R/2
lout
R/4
c.
l’in
l’in
l’in
Figure 3.46  ♦  Scenario 2 performance with finite buffers

290         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
Let’s consider the connection from Host A to Host C, passing through routers 
R1 and R2. The A–C connection shares router R1 with the D–B connection and 
shares router R2 with the B–D connection. For extremely small values of lin, buffer 
overflows are rare (as in congestion scenarios 1 and 2), and the throughput approxi-
mately equals the offered load. For slightly larger values of lin, the corresponding 
throughput is also larger, since more original data is being transmitted into the net-
work and delivered to the destination, and overflows are still rare. Thus, for small 
values of lin, an increase in lin results in an increase in lout.
Having considered the case of extremely low traffic, let’s next examine the case 
that lin (and hence l′in) is extremely large. Consider router R2. The A–C traffic 
arriving to router R2 (which arrives at R2 after being forwarded from R1) can have 
an arrival rate at R2 that is at most R, the capacity of the link from R1 to R2, regard-
less of the value of lin. If l′in is extremely large for all connections (including the 
Host B
Host A
R1
R4
R2
R3
Host C
Host D
Finite shared output
link buffers
lin: original data
l’in: original
data, plus
retransmitted
data
lout
Figure 3.47  ♦  Four senders, routers with finite buffers, and multihop paths

3.6    •    Principles of Congestion Control         291
B–D connection), then the arrival rate of B–D traffic at R2 can be much larger than 
that of the A–C traffic. Because the A–C and B–D traffic must compete at router 
R2 for the limited amount of buffer space, the amount of A–C traffic that success-
fully gets through R2 (that is, is not lost due to buffer overflow) becomes smaller 
and smaller as the offered load from B–D gets larger and larger. In the limit, as the 
offered load approaches infinity, an empty buffer at R2 is immediately filled by a 
B–D packet, and the throughput of the A–C connection at R2 goes to zero. This, in 
turn, implies that the A–C end-to-end throughput goes to zero in the limit of heavy 
traffic. These considerations give rise to the offered load versus throughput tradeoff 
shown in Figure 3.48.
The reason for the eventual decrease in throughput with increasing offered 
load is evident when one considers the amount of wasted work done by the net-
work. In the high-traffic scenario outlined above, whenever a packet is dropped at 
a second-hop router, the work done by the first-hop router in forwarding a packet 
to the second-hop router ends up being “wasted.” The network would have been 
equally well off (more accurately, equally bad off) if the first router had simply 
discarded that packet and remained idle. More to the point, the transmission capac-
ity used at the first router to forward the packet to the second router could have 
been much more profitably used to transmit a different packet. (For example, when 
selecting a packet for transmission, it might be better for a router to give priority 
to packets that have already traversed some number of upstream routers.) So here 
we see yet another cost of dropping a packet due to congestion—when a packet 
is dropped along a path, the transmission capacity that was used at each of the 
upstream links to forward that packet to the point at which it is dropped ends up 
having been wasted.
R/2
lout
l’in
Figure 3.48  ♦  Scenario 3 performance with finite buffers and multihop 
paths

292         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
3.6.2 Approaches to Congestion Control
In Section 3.7, we’ll examine TCP’s specific approach to congestion control in great 
detail. Here, we identify the two broad approaches to congestion control that are 
taken in practice and discuss specific network architectures and congestion-control 
protocols embodying these approaches.
At the highest level, we can distinguish among congestion-control approaches 
by whether the network layer provides explicit assistance to the transport layer for 
congestion-control purposes:
•	 End-to-end congestion control. In an end-to-end approach to congestion control, 
the network layer provides no explicit support to the transport layer for conges-
tion-control purposes. Even the presence of network congestion must be inferred 
by the end systems based only on observed network behavior (for example, packet 
loss and delay). We’ll see shortly in Section 3.7.1 that TCP takes this end-to-end 
approach toward congestion control, since the IP layer is not required to provide 
feedback to hosts regarding network congestion. TCP segment loss (as indicated 
by a timeout or the receipt of three duplicate acknowledgments) is taken as an 
indication of network congestion, and TCP decreases its window size accord-
ingly. We’ll also see a more recent proposal for TCP congestion control that 
uses increasing round-trip segment delay as an indicator of increased network 
congestion
•	 Network-assisted congestion control. With network-assisted congestion control, 
routers provide explicit feedback to the sender and/or receiver regarding the con-
gestion state of the network. This feedback may be as simple as a single bit indi-
cating congestion at a link—an approach taken in the early IBM SNA [Schwartz 
1982], DEC DECnet [Jain 1989; Ramakrishnan 1990] architectures, and ATM 
[Black 1995] network architectures. More sophisticated feedback is also possible. 
For example, in ATM Available Bite Rate (ABR) congestion control, a router 
informs the sender of the maximum host sending rate it (the router) can support 
on an outgoing link. As noted above, the Internet-default versions of IP and TCP 
adopt an end-to-end approach towards congestion control. We’ll see, however, 
in Section 3.7.2 that, more recently, IP and TCP may also optionally implement 
network-assisted congestion control.
For network-assisted congestion control, congestion information is typically 
fed back from the network to the sender in one of two ways, as shown in Fig-
ure 3.49. Direct feedback may be sent from a network router to the sender. This 
form of notification typically takes the form of a choke packet (essentially say-
ing, “I’m congested!”). The second and more common form of notification occurs 
when a router marks/updates a field in a packet flowing from sender to receiver to 
indicate congestion. Upon receipt of a marked packet, the receiver then notifies 
the sender of the congestion indication. This latter form of notification takes a full 
round-trip time.

3.7    •    TCP Congestion Control         293
3.7	 TCP Congestion Control
In this section, we return to our study of TCP. As we learned in Section 3.5, TCP provides 
a reliable transport service between two processes running on different hosts. Another key 
component of TCP is its congestion-control mechanism. As indicated in the previous sec-
tion, what we might refer to as “Classic”  TCP—the version of TCP standardized in [RFC 
2581] and most recently [RFC 5681]—uses end-to-end congestion control rather than 
network-assisted congestion control, since the IP layer provides no explicit feedback to 
the end systems regarding network congestion. We’ll first cover this “classic” version of 
TCP in depth in Section 7.3.1. In Section 7.3.2, we’ll then look at newer flavors of TCP 
that use an explicit congestion indication provided by the network layer, or differ a bit 
from “classic” TCP in any of several different ways. We’ll then cover the challenge of 
providing fairness among transport layer flows that must share a congested link.
3.7.1 Classic TCP Congestion Control
The approach taken by TCP is to have each sender limit the rate at which it sends traf-
fic into its connection as a function of perceived network congestion. If a TCP sender 
perceives that there is little congestion on the path between itself and the destination, 
then the TCP sender increases its send rate; if the sender perceives that there is conges-
tion along the path, then the sender reduces its send rate. But this approach raises three 
questions. First, how does a TCP sender limit the rate at which it sends traffic into its 
connection? Second, how does a TCP sender perceive that there is congestion on the 
path between itself and the destination? And third, what algorithm should the sender 
use to change its send rate as a function of perceived end-to-end congestion?
Host A
Network feedback via receiver
Direct network
feedback
Host B
Figure 3.49  ♦  Two feedback pathways for network-indicated congestion 
information

294         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
Let’s first examine how a TCP sender limits the rate at which it sends traffic into 
its connection. In Section 3.5, we saw that each side of a TCP connection consists of 
a receive buffer, a send buffer, and several variables (LastByteRead, rwnd, and 
so on). The TCP congestion-control mechanism operating at the sender keeps track 
of an additional variable, the congestion window. The congestion window, denoted 
cwnd, imposes a constraint on the rate at which a TCP sender can send traffic into 
the network. Specifically, the amount of unacknowledged data at a sender may not 
exceed the minimum of cwnd and rwnd, that is:
LastByteSent – LastByteAcked … min{cwnd, rwnd}
In order to focus on congestion control (as opposed to flow control), let us henceforth 
assume that the TCP receive buffer is so large that the receive-window constraint can 
be ignored; thus, the amount of unacknowledged data at the sender is solely limited 
by cwnd. We will also assume that the sender always has data to send, that is, that 
all segments in the congestion window are sent.
The constraint above limits the amount of unacknowledged data at the sender and 
therefore indirectly limits the sender’s send rate. To see this, consider a connection for 
which loss and packet transmission delays are negligible. Then, roughly, at the begin-
ning of every RTT, the constraint permits the sender to send cwnd bytes of data into the 
connection; at the end of the RTT the sender receives acknowledgments for the data. 
Thus the sender’s send rate is roughly cwnd/RTT bytes/sec. By adjusting the value of 
cwnd, the sender can therefore adjust the rate at which it sends data into its connection.
Let’s next consider how a TCP sender perceives that there is congestion on the 
path between itself and the destination. Let us define a “loss event” at a TCP sender 
as the occurrence of either a timeout or the receipt of three duplicate ACKs from the 
receiver. (Recall our discussion in Section 3.5.4 of the timeout event in Figure 3.33 
and the subsequent modification to include fast retransmit on receipt of three dupli-
cate ACKs.) When there is excessive congestion, then one (or more) router buffers 
along the path overflows, causing a datagram (containing a TCP segment) to be 
dropped. The dropped datagram, in turn, results in a loss event at the sender—either 
a timeout or the receipt of three duplicate ACKs—which is taken by the sender to be 
an indication of congestion on the sender-to-receiver path.
Having considered how congestion is detected, let’s next consider the more opti-
mistic case when the network is congestion-free, that is, when a loss event doesn’t 
occur. In this case, acknowledgments for previously unacknowledged segments 
will be received at the TCP sender. As we’ll see, TCP will take the arrival of these 
acknowledgments as an indication that all is well—that segments being transmitted 
into the network are being successfully delivered to the destination—and will use 
acknowledgments to increase its congestion window size (and hence its transmis-
sion rate). Note that if acknowledgments arrive at a relatively slow rate (e.g., if the 
end-end path has high delay or contains a low-bandwidth link), then the congestion 
window will be increased at a relatively slow rate. On the other hand, if acknowl-
edgments arrive at a high rate, then the congestion window will be increased more 

3.7    •    TCP Congestion Control         295
quickly. Because TCP uses acknowledgments to trigger (or clock) its increase in 
congestion window size, TCP is said to be self-clocking.
Given the mechanism of adjusting the value of cwnd to control the sending rate, 
the critical question remains: How should a TCP sender determine the rate at which it 
should send? If TCP senders collectively send too fast, they can congest the network, 
leading to the type of congestion collapse that we saw in Figure 3.48. Indeed, the ver-
sion of TCP that we’ll study shortly was developed in response to observed Internet 
congestion collapse [Jacobson 1988] under earlier versions of TCP. However, if TCP 
senders are too cautious and send too slowly, they could under utilize the bandwidth 
in the network; that is, the TCP senders could send at a higher rate without congest-
ing the network. How then do the TCP senders determine their sending rates such 
that they don’t congest the network but at the same time make use of all the avail-
able bandwidth? Are TCP senders explicitly coordinated, or is there a distributed 
approach in which the TCP senders can set their sending rates based only on local 
information? TCP answers these questions using the following guiding principles:
•	 A lost segment implies congestion, and hence, the TCP sender’s rate should be 
decreased when a segment is lost. Recall from our discussion in Section 3.5.4, 
that a timeout event or the receipt of four acknowledgments for a given segment 
(one original ACK and then three duplicate ACKs) is interpreted as an implicit 
“loss event” indication of the segment following the quadruply ACKed segment, 
triggering a retransmission of the lost segment. From a congestion-control stand-
point, the question is how the TCP sender should decrease its congestion window 
size, and hence its sending rate, in response to this inferred loss event.
•	 An acknowledged segment indicates that the network is delivering the sender’s 
segments to the receiver, and hence, the sender’s rate can be increased when an 
ACK arrives for a previously unacknowledged segment. The arrival of acknowl-
edgments is taken as an implicit indication that all is well—segments are being 
successfully delivered from sender to receiver, and the network is thus not con-
gested. The congestion window size can thus be increased.
•	 Bandwidth probing. Given ACKs indicating a congestion-free source-to-destina-
tion path and loss events indicating a congested path, TCP’s strategy for adjusting 
its transmission rate is to increase its rate in response to arriving ACKs until a loss 
event occurs, at which point, the transmission rate is decreased. The TCP sender 
thus increases its transmission rate to probe for the rate that at which congestion 
onset begins, backs off from that rate, and then to begins probing again to see 
if the congestion onset rate has changed. The TCP sender’s behavior is perhaps 
analogous to the child who requests (and gets) more and more goodies until finally 
he/she is finally told “No!”, backs off a bit, but then begins making requests again 
shortly afterward. Note that there is no explicit signaling of congestion state by 
the network—ACKs and loss events serve as implicit signals—and that each TCP 
sender acts on local information asynchronously from other TCP senders.
Given this overview of TCP congestion control, we’re now in a position to consider the 
details of the celebrated TCP congestion-control algorithm, which was first described 

296         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
in [Jacobson 1988] and is standardized in [RFC 5681]. The algorithm has three major 
components: (1) slow start, (2) congestion avoidance, and (3) fast recovery. Slow start 
and congestion avoidance are mandatory components of TCP, differing in how they 
increase the size of cwnd in response to received ACKs. We’ll see shortly that slow 
start increases the size of cwnd more rapidly (despite its name!) than congestion avoid-
ance. Fast recovery is recommended, but not required, for TCP senders.
Slow Start
When a TCP connection begins, the value of cwnd is typically initialized to a small 
value of 1 MSS [RFC 3390], resulting in an initial sending rate of roughly MSS/
RTT. For example, if MSS = 500 bytes and RTT = 200 msec, the resulting initial 
sending rate is only about 20 kbps. Since the available bandwidth to the TCP sender 
may be much larger than MSS/RTT, the TCP sender would like to find the amount of 
available bandwidth quickly. Thus, in the slow-start state, the value of cwnd begins 
at 1 MSS and increases by 1 MSS every time a transmitted segment is first acknowl-
edged. In the example of Figure 3.50, TCP sends the first segment into the network 
Host A
Host B
one segment
two segments
four segments
RTT
Time
Time
Figure 3.50  ♦  TCP slow start

3.7    •    TCP Congestion Control         297
and waits for an acknowledgment. When this acknowledgment arrives, the TCP 
sender increases the congestion window by one MSS and sends out two maximum-
sized segments. These segments are then acknowledged, with the sender increasing 
the congestion window by 1 MSS for each of the acknowledged segments, giving a 
congestion window of 4 MSS, and so on. This process results in a doubling of the 
sending rate every RTT. Thus, the TCP send rate starts slow but grows exponentially 
during the slow start phase.
But when should this exponential growth end? Slow start provides several 
answers to this question. First, if there is a loss event (i.e., congestion) indicated 
by a timeout, the TCP sender sets the value of cwnd to 1 and begins the slow start 
process anew. It also sets the value of a second state variable, ssthresh (short-
hand for “slow start threshold”) to cwnd/2—half of the value of the congestion 
window value when congestion was detected. The second way in which slow start 
may end is directly tied to the value of ssthresh. Since ssthresh is half the 
value of cwnd when congestion was last detected, it might be a bit reckless to keep 
doubling cwnd when it reaches or surpasses the value of ssthresh. Thus, when 
the value of cwnd equals ssthresh, slow start ends and TCP transitions into con-
gestion avoidance mode. As we’ll see, TCP increases cwnd more cautiously when 
in congestion-avoidance mode. The final way in which slow start can end is if three 
duplicate ACKs are detected, in which case TCP performs a fast retransmit (see Sec-
tion 3.5.4) and enters the fast recovery state, as discussed below. TCP’s behavior in 
slow start is summarized in the FSM description of TCP congestion control in Figure 
3.51. The slow-start algorithm traces it roots to [Jacobson 1988]; an approach similar 
to slow start was also proposed independently in [Jain 1986].
Congestion Avoidance
On entry to the congestion-avoidance state, the value of cwnd is approximately half 
its value when congestion was last encountered—congestion could be just around 
the corner! Thus, rather than doubling the value of cwnd every RTT, TCP adopts a 
more conservative approach and increases the value of cwnd by just a single MSS 
every RTT [RFC 5681]. This can be accomplished in several ways. A common 
approach is for the TCP sender to increase cwnd by MSS bytes (MSS/cwnd) when-
ever a new acknowledgment arrives. For example, if MSS is 1,460 bytes and cwnd 
is 14,600 bytes, then 10 segments are being sent within an RTT. Each arriving ACK 
(assuming one ACK per segment) increases the congestion window size by 1/10 
MSS, and thus, the value of the congestion window will have increased by one MSS 
after ACKs when all 10 segments have been received.
But when should congestion avoidance’s linear increase (of 1 MSS per RTT) 
end? TCP’s congestion-avoidance algorithm behaves the same when a timeout occurs 
as in the case of slow start: The value of cwnd is set to 1 MSS, and the value of 
ssthresh is updated to half the value of cwnd when the loss event occurred. Recall, 
however, that a loss event also can be triggered by a triple duplicate ACK event. 

298         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
In this case, the network is continuing to deliver some segments from sender to receiver 
(as indicated by the receipt of duplicate ACKs). So TCP’s behavior to this type of loss 
event should be less drastic than with a timeout-indicated loss: TCP halves the value 
of cwnd (adding in 3 MSS for good measure to account for the triple duplicate ACKs 
received) and records the value of ssthresh to be half the value of cwnd when the 
triple duplicate ACKs were received. The fast-recovery state is then entered.
Fast Recovery
In fast recovery, the value of cwnd is increased by 1 MSS for every duplicate 
ACK received for the missing segment that caused TCP to enter the fast-recovery 
state. Eventually, when an ACK arrives for the missing segment, TCP enters the 
Slow
start
duplicate ACK
dupACKcount++
duplicate ACK
dupACKcount++
timeout
ssthresh=cwnd/2
cwnd=1 MSS
dupACKcount=0
cwnd=1 MSS
ssthresh=64 KB
dupACKcount=0
timeout
ssthresh=cwnd/2
cwnd=1
dupACKcount=0
timeout
ssthresh=cwnd/2
cwnd=1 MSS
dupACKcount=0
cwnd $ssthresh
Congestion
avoidance
Fast
recovery
new ACK
cwnd=cwnd+MSS •(MSS/cwnd)
dupACKcount=0
transmit new segment(s), as allowed
new ACK
cwnd=cwnd+MSS
dupACKcount=0
transmit new segment(s), as allowed
retransmit missing segment
retransmit missing segment
dupACKcount==3
ssthresh=cwnd/2
cwnd=ssthresh+3•MSS
retransmit missing segment
duplicate ACK
cwnd=cwnd+MSS
transmit new segment(s), as allowed
dupACKcount==3
ssthresh=cwnd/2
cwnd=ssthresh+3•MSS
retransmit missing segment
retransmit missing segment
new ACK
cwnd=ssthresh
dupACKcount=0
L
L
Figure 3.51  ♦  FSM description of TCP congestion control
Examining the behavior 
of TCP
VideoNote

3.7    •    TCP Congestion Control         299
congestion-avoidance state after deflating cwnd. If a timeout event occurs, fast 
recovery transitions to the slow-start state after performing the same actions as in 
slow start and congestion avoidance: The value of cwnd is set to 1 MSS, and the 
value of ssthresh is set to half the value of cwnd when the loss event occurred.
TCP SPLITTING: OPTIMIZING THE PERFORMANCE OF CLOUD SERVICES
For cloud services such as search, e-mail, and social networks, it is desirable to provide a 
high-level of responsiveness, ideally giving users the illusion that the services are running 
within their own end systems (including their smartphones). This can be a major challenge, 
as users are often located far away from the data centers responsible for serving the 
dynamic content associated with the cloud services. Indeed, if the end system is far from 
a data center, then the RTT will be large, potentially leading to poor response time perfor-
mance due to TCP slow start.
As a case study, consider the delay in receiving a response for a search query. 
Typically, the server requires three TCP windows during slow start to deliver the response 
[Pathak 2010]. Thus the time from when an end system initiates a TCP connection until the 
time when it receives the last packet of the response is roughly 4 # RTT (one RTT to set up 
the TCP connection plus three RTTs for the three windows of data) plus the processing time 
in the data center. These RTT delays can lead to a noticeable delay in returning search 
results for a significant fraction of queries. Moreover, there can be significant packet loss 
in access networks, leading to TCP retransmissions and even larger delays.
One way to mitigate this problem and improve user-perceived performance is to  
(1) deploy front-end servers closer to the users, and (2) utilize TCP splitting by break-
ing the TCP connection at the front-end server. With TCP splitting, the client establishes 
a TCP connection to the nearby front-end, and the front-end maintains a persistent TCP 
connection to the data center with a very large TCP congestion window [Tariq 2008, 
Pathak 2010, Chen 2011]. With this approach, the response time roughly becomes 
4 # RTTFE + RTTBE + processing time, where RTTFE is the round-trip time between client and 
front-end server, and RTTBE is the round-trip time between the front-end server and the data 
center (back-end server). If the front-end server is close to client, then this response time 
approximately becomes RTT plus processing time, since RTTFE is negligibly small and RTTBE 
is approximately RTT. In summary, TCP splitting can reduce the networking delay roughly 
from 4 # RTT to RTT, significantly improving user-perceived performance, particularly for 
users who are far from the nearest data center. TCP splitting also helps reduce TCP  
retransmission delays caused by losses in access networks. Google and Akamai have 
made extensive use of their CDN servers in access networks (recall our discussion in 
Section 2.6) to perform TCP splitting for the cloud services they support [Chen 2011].
PRINCIPLES IN PRACTICE

300         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
Fast recovery is a recommended, but not required, component of TCP [RFC 
5681]. It is interesting that an early version of TCP, known as TCP Tahoe, uncon-
ditionally cut its congestion window to 1 MSS and entered the slow-start phase after 
either a timeout-indicated or triple-duplicate-ACK-indicated loss event. The newer 
version of TCP, TCP Reno, incorporated fast recovery.
Figure 3.52 illustrates the evolution of TCP’s congestion window for both Reno 
and Tahoe. In this figure, the threshold is initially equal to 8 MSS. For the first 
eight transmission rounds, Tahoe and Reno take identical actions. The congestion 
window climbs exponentially fast during slow start and hits the threshold at the fourth 
round of transmission. The congestion window then climbs linearly until a triple 
duplicate- ACK event occurs, just after transmission round 8. Note that the congestion 
window is 12 # MSS when this loss event occurs. The value of ssthresh is then set 
to 0.5 # cwnd = 6 # MSS. Under TCP Reno, the congestion window is set to cwnd = 
9 # MSS and then grows linearly. Under TCP Tahoe, the congestion window is set to 
1 MSS and grows exponentially until it reaches the value of ssthresh, at which 
point it grows linearly.
Figure 3.51 presents the complete FSM description of TCP’s congestion-control 
algorithms—slow start, congestion avoidance, and fast recovery. The figure also 
indicates where transmission of new segments or retransmitted segments can occur. 
Although it is important to distinguish between TCP error control/retransmission and 
TCP congestion control, it’s also important to appreciate how these two aspects of 
TCP are inextricably linked.
TCP Congestion Control: Retrospective
Having delved into the details of slow start, congestion avoidance, and fast recovery, 
it’s worthwhile to now step back and view the forest from the trees. Ignoring the 
0
1
0
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Transmission round
TCP Tahoe
ssthresh
ssthresh
Congestion window
(in segments)
9
10 11 12 13 14 15
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
TCP Reno
Figure 3.52  ♦  Evolution of TCP’s congestion window (Tahoe and Reno)

3.7    •    TCP Congestion Control         301
initial slow-start period when a connection begins and assuming that losses are indi-
cated by triple duplicate ACKs rather than timeouts, TCP’s congestion control con-
sists of linear (additive) increase in cwnd of 1 MSS per RTT and then a halving 
(multiplicative decrease) of cwnd on a triple duplicate-ACK event. For this reason, 
TCP congestion control is often referred to as an additive-increase, multiplicative-
decrease (AIMD) form of congestion control. AIMD congestion control gives rise 
to the “saw tooth” behavior shown in Figure 3.53, which also nicely illustrates our 
earlier intuition of TCP “probing” for bandwidth—TCP linearly increases its conges-
tion window size (and hence its transmission rate) until a triple duplicate-ACK event 
occurs. It then decreases its congestion window size by a factor of two but then again 
begins increasing it linearly, probing to see if there is additional available bandwidth.
TCP’s AIMD algorithm was developed based on a tremendous amount of 
engineering insight and experimentation with congestion control in operational 
networks. Ten years after TCP’s development, theoretical analyses showed that 
TCP’s congestion-control algorithm serves as a distributed asynchronous-optimization 
algorithm that results in several important aspects of user and network performance 
being simultaneously optimized [Kelly 1998]. A rich theory of congestion control 
has since been developed [Srikant 2012].
TCP Cubic
Given TCP Reno’s additive-increase, multiplicative-decrease approach to conges-
tion control, one might naturally wonder whether this is the best way to “probe” for a 
packet sending rate that is just below the threshold of triggering packet loss. Indeed, 
cutting the sending rate in half (or even worse, cutting the sending rate to one packet 
per RTT as in an earlier version of TCP known as TCP Tahoe) and then increasing 
rather slowly over time may be overly cautious. If the state of the ­congested link 
24 K
16 K
8 K
Time
Congestion window
Figure 3.53  ♦  Additive-increase, multiplicative-decrease congestion control

302         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
where packet loss occurred hasn’t changed much, then perhaps it’s better to more 
quickly ramp up the sending rate to get close to the pre-loss sending rate and only 
then probe cautiously for bandwidth. This insight lies at the heart of a flavor of TCP 
known as TCP CUBIC [Ha 2008, RFC 8312].
TCP CUBIC differs only slightly from TCP Reno. Once again, the congestion 
window is increased only on ACK receipt, and the slow start and fast recovery phases 
remain the same. CUBIC only changes the congestion avoidance phase, as follows:
•	 Let Wmax be size of TCP’s congestion control window when loss was last detected, 
and let K be the future point in time when TCP CUBIC’s window size will again reach 
Wmax, assuming no losses. Several tunable CUBIC parameters determine the value K, 
that is, how quickly the protocol’s congestion window size would reach Wmax.
•	 CUBIC increases the congestion window as a function of cube of the distance 
between the current time, t, and K. Thus, when t is further away from K, the 
congestion window size increases are much larger than when t is close to K. That 
is, CUBIC quickly ramps up TCP’s sending rate to get close to the pre-loss rate, 
Wmax, and only then probes cautiously for bandwidth as it approaches Wmax.
•	 When t is greater than K, the cubic rule implies that CUBIC’s congestion window 
increases are small when t is still close to K (which is good if the congestion 
level of the link causing loss hasn’t changed much) but then increases rapidly as 
t exceeds K (which allows CUBIC to more quickly find a new operating point if 
the congestion level of the link that caused loss has changed significantly).
Under these rules, the idealized performance of TCP Reno and TCP CUBIC are 
compared in Figure 3.54, adapted from [Huston 2017]. We see the slow start phase 
Time
TCP
sending
rate
TCP Reno
TCP CUBIC
Wmax
t0
t1
t2
t3
t4
Key:
Figure 3.54  ♦  TCP congestion avoidance sending rates: TCP Reno and 
TCP CUBIC

3.7    •    TCP Congestion Control         303
ending at t0. Then, when congestion loss occurs at t1, t2, and t3, CUBIC more quickly 
ramps up close to Wmax (thereby enjoying more overall throughput than TCP Reno). 
We can see graphically how TCP CUBIC attempts to maintain the flow for as long 
as possible just below the (unknown to the sender) congestion threshold. Note that 
at t3, the congestion level has presumably decreased appreciably, allowing both TCP 
Reno and TCP CUBIC to achieve sending rates higher than Wmax.
TCP CUBIC has recently gained wide deployment. While measurements 
taken around 2000 on popular Web servers showed that nearly all were running 
some ­version of TCP Reno [Padhye 2001], more recent measurements of the 5000 
most popular Web servers shows that nearly 50% are running a version of TCP 
CUBIC [Yang 2014], which is also the default version of TCP used in the Linux 
operating system.
Macroscopic Description of TCP Reno Throughput
Given the saw-toothed behavior of TCP Reno, it’s natural to consider what the 
average throughput (that is, the average rate) of a long-lived TCP Reno connec-
tion might be. In this analysis, we’ll ignore the slow-start phases that occur after 
timeout events. (These phases are typically very short, since the sender grows out 
of the phase exponentially fast.) During a particular round-trip interval, the rate at 
which TCP sends data is a function of the congestion window and the current RTT. 
When the window size is w bytes and the current round-trip time is RTT seconds, 
then TCP’s transmission rate is roughly w/RTT. TCP then probes for additional 
bandwidth by increasing w by 1 MSS each RTT until a loss event occurs. Denote by 
W the value of w when a loss event occurs. Assuming that RTT and W are approxi-
mately constant over the duration of the connection, the TCP transmission rate 
ranges from W/(2 · RTT) to W/RTT.
These assumptions lead to a highly simplified macroscopic model for the steady-
state behavior of TCP. The network drops a packet from the connection when the rate 
increases to W/RTT; the rate is then cut in half and then increases by MSS/RTT every 
RTT until it again reaches W/RTT. This process repeats itself over and over again. 
Because TCP’s throughput (that is, rate) increases linearly between the two extreme 
values, we have
average throughput of a connection = 0.75 # W
RTT
Using this highly idealized model for the steady-state dynamics of TCP, we 
can also derive an interesting expression that relates a connection’s loss rate to its 
available bandwidth [Mathis 1997]. This derivation is outlined in the homework 
problems. A more sophisticated model that has been found empirically to agree with 
measured data is [Padhye 2000].

304         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
3.7.2 Network-Assisted Explicit Congestion Notification 
and Delayed-based Congestion Control
Since the initial standardization of slow start and congestion avoidance in the late 
1980’s [RFC 1122], TCP has implemented the form of end-end congestion control 
that we studied in Section 3.7.1: a TCP sender receives no explicit congestion indica-
tions from the network layer, and instead infers congestion through observed packet 
loss. More recently, extensions to both IP and TCP [RFC 3168] have been proposed, 
implemented, and deployed that allow the network to explicitly signal congestion to 
a TCP sender and receiver. In addition, a number of variations of TCP congestion 
control protocols have been proposed that infer congestion using measured packet 
delay. We’ll take a look at both network-assisted and delay-based congestion control 
in this section.
Explicit Congestion Notification
Explicit Congestion Notification [RFC 3168] is the form of network-assisted con-
gestion control performed within the Internet. As shown in Figure 3.55, both TCP 
and IP are involved. At the network layer, two bits (with four possible values, 
­overall) in the Type of Service field of the IP datagram header (which we’ll discuss 
in Section 4.3) are used for ECN.
One setting of the ECN bits is used by a router to indicate that it (the router) is 
experiencing congestion. This congestion indication is then carried in the marked 
IP datagram to the destination host, which then informs the sending host, as shown 
in Figure 3.55. RFC 3168 does not provide a definition of when a router is con-
gested; that decision is a configuration choice made possible by the router vendor, 
and decided by the network operator. However, the intuition is that the congestion 
indication bit can be set to signal the onset of congestion to the send before loss actu-
ally occurs. A second setting of the ECN bits is used by the sending host to inform 
routers that the sender and receiver are ECN-capable, and thus capable of taking 
action in response to ECN-indicated network congestion.
As shown in Figure 3.55, when the TCP in the receiving host receives an ECN 
congestion indication via a received datagram, the TCP in the receiving host informs 
the TCP in the sending host of the congestion indication by setting the ECE (Explicit 
Congestion Notification Echo) bit (see Figure 3.29) in a receiver-to-sender TCP 
ACK segment. The TCP sender, in turn, reacts to an ACK with a congestion indica-
tion by halving the congestion window, as it would react to a lost segment using fast 
retransmit, and sets the CWR (Congestion Window Reduced) bit in the header of the 
next transmitted TCP sender-to-receiver segment.
Other transport-layer protocols besides TCP may also make use of network-
layer-signaled ECN. The Datagram Congestion Control Protocol (DCCP) [RFC 
4340] provides a low-overhead, congestion-controlled UDP-like unreliable service 
that utilizes ECN. DCTCP (Data Center TCP) [Alizadeh 2010, RFC 8257] and 

3.7    •    TCP Congestion Control         305
DCQCN (Data Center Quantized Congestion Notification) [Zhu 2015] designed 
­specifically for data center networks, also makes use of ECN. Recent Internet meas-
urements show increasing deployment of ECN capabilities in popular servers as well 
as in routers along paths to those servers [Kühlewind 2013].
Delay-based Congestion Control
Recall from our ECN discussion above that a congested router can set the congestion 
indication bit to signal congestion onset to senders before full buffers cause ­packets 
to be dropped at that router. This allows senders to decrease their sending rates 
­earlier, hopefully before packet loss, thus avoiding costly packet loss and retrans-
mission. A second congestion-avoidance approach takes a delay-based approach to 
also proactively detect congestion onset before packet loss occurs.
In TCP Vegas [Brakmo 1995], the sender measures the RTT of the source-to-
destination path for all acknowledged packets. Let RTTmin be the minimum of these 
measurements at a sender; this occurs when the path is uncongested and packets 
experience minimal queuing delay. If TCP Vegas’ congestion window size is cwnd, 
then the uncongested throughput rate would be cwnd/RTTmin. The intuition behind 
TCP Vegas is that if the actual sender-measured throughput is close to this value, the 
TCP sending rate can be increased since (by definition and by measurement) the path 
is not yet congested. However, if the actual sender-measured throughput is signifi-
cantly less than the uncongested throughput rate, the path is congested and the Vegas 
TCP sender will decrease its sending rate. Details can be found in [Brakmo 1995].
ECN Echo = 1
Host A
Host B
ECN = 11
ECN Echo bit set in 
receiver-to-sender
TCP ACK segment
ECN bits set in IP
datagram header
at congested router
Figure 3.55  ♦  Explicit Congestion Notification: network-assisted  
congestion control

306         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
TCP Vegas operates under the intuition that TCP senders should “Keep the pipe 
just full, but no fuller” [Kleinrock 2018]. “Keeping the pipe full” means that links 
(in particular the bottleneck link that is limiting a connection’s throughput) are kept 
busy transmitting, doing useful work; “but no fuller” means that there is nothing to 
gain (except increased delay!) if large queues are allowed to build up while the pipe 
is kept full.
The BBR congestion control protocol [Cardwell 2017] builds on ideas in TCP 
Vegas, and incorporates mechanisms that allows it compete fairly (see Section 3.7.3) 
with TCP non-BBR senders. [Cardwell 2017] reports that in 2016, Google began 
using BBR for all TCP traffic on its private B4 network [Jain 2013] that intercon-
nects Google data centers, replacing CUBIC. It is also being deployed on Google and 
YouTube Web servers. Other delay-based TCP congestion control protocols include 
TIMELY for data center networks [Mittal 2015], and Compound TCP (CTPC) [Tan 
2006] and FAST [Wei 2006] for high-speed and long distance networks.
3.7.3 Fairness
Consider K TCP connections, each with a different end-to-end path, but all pass-
ing through a bottleneck link with transmission rate R bps. (By bottleneck link, we 
mean that for each connection, all the other links along the connection’s path are not 
congested and have abundant transmission capacity as compared with the transmis-
sion capacity of the bottleneck link.) Suppose each connection is transferring a large 
file and there is no UDP traffic passing through the bottleneck link. A congestion-
control mechanism is said to be fair if the average transmission rate of each connec-
tion is approximately R/K; that is, each connection gets an equal share of the link 
bandwidth.
Is TCP’s AIMD algorithm fair, particularly given that different TCP connec-
tions may start at different times and thus may have different window sizes at a given 
point in time? [Chiu 1989] provides an elegant and intuitive explanation of why TCP 
congestion control converges to provide an equal share of a bottleneck link’s band-
width among competing TCP connections.
Let’s consider the simple case of two TCP connections sharing a single link 
with transmission rate R, as shown in Figure 3.55. Assume that the two connections 
have the same MSS and RTT (so that if they have the same congestion window size, 
then they have the same throughput), that they have a large amount of data to send, 
and that no other TCP connections or UDP datagrams traverse this shared link. Also, 
ignore the slow-start phase of TCP and assume the TCP connections are operating in 
CA mode (AIMD) at all times.
Figure 3.56 plots the throughput realized by the two TCP connections. If TCP is 
to share the link bandwidth equally between the two connections, then the realized 
throughput should fall along the 45-degree arrow (equal bandwidth share) emanat-
ing from the origin. Ideally, the sum of the two throughputs should equal R. (Cer-
tainly, each connection receiving an equal, but zero, share of the link capacity is not 

3.7    •    TCP Congestion Control         307
a desirable situation!) So the goal should be to have the achieved throughputs fall 
somewhere near the intersection of the equal bandwidth share line and the full band-
width utilization line in Figure 3.56.
Suppose that the TCP window sizes are such that at a given point in time, con-
nections 1 and 2 realize throughputs indicated by point A in Figure 3.56. Because the 
amount of link bandwidth jointly consumed by the two connections is less than R, no 
loss will occur, and both connections will increase their window by 1 MSS per RTT 
as a result of TCP’s congestion-avoidance algorithm. Thus, the joint throughput of 
the two connections proceeds along a 45-degree line (equal increase for both connec-
tions) starting from point A. Eventually, the link bandwidth jointly consumed by the 
two connections will be greater than R, and eventually packet loss will occur. Sup-
pose that connections 1 and 2 experience packet loss when they realize throughputs 
indicated by point B. Connections 1 and 2 then decrease their windows by a factor of 
two. The resulting throughputs realized are thus at point C, halfway along a vector 
starting at B and ending at the origin. Because the joint bandwidth use is less than R 
at point C, the two connections again increase their throughputs along a 45-degree 
line starting from C. Eventually, loss will again occur, for example, at point D, and 
the two connections again decrease their window sizes by a factor of two, and so on. 
You should convince yourself that the bandwidth realized by the two connections 
eventually fluctuates along the equal bandwidth share line. You should also convince 
yourself that the two connections will converge to this behavior regardless of where 
they are in the two-dimensional space! Although a number of idealized assumptions 
lie behind this scenario, it still provides an intuitive feel for why TCP results in an 
equal sharing of bandwidth among connections.
In our idealized scenario, we assumed that only TCP connections traverse the 
bottleneck link, that the connections have the same RTT value, and that only a 
­single TCP connection is associated with a host-destination pair. In practice, these 
­conditions are typically not met, and client-server applications can thus obtain very 
unequal portions of link bandwidth. In particular, it has been shown that when 
TCP connection 2
TCP connection 1
Bottleneck
router capacity R
Figure 3.56  ♦  Two TCP connections sharing a single bottleneck link

308         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
multiple connections share a common bottleneck, those sessions with a smaller RTT 
are able to grab the available bandwidth at that link more quickly as it becomes free 
(that is, open their congestion windows faster) and thus will enjoy higher throughput 
than those connections with larger RTTs [Lakshman 1997].
Fairness and UDP
We have just seen how TCP congestion control regulates an application’s trans-
mission rate via the congestion window mechanism. Many multimedia applications, 
such as Internet phone and video conferencing, often do not run over TCP for this 
very reason—they do not want their transmission rate throttled, even if the network 
is very congested. Instead, these applications prefer to run over UDP, which does 
not have built-in congestion control. When running over UDP, applications can 
pump their audio and video into the network at a constant rate and occasionally lose 
packets, rather than reduce their rates to “fair” levels at times of congestion and not 
lose any packets. From the perspective of TCP, the multimedia applications running 
over UDP are not being fair—they do not cooperate with the other connections nor 
adjust their transmission rates appropriately. Because TCP congestion control will 
decrease its transmission rate in the face of increasing congestion (loss), while UDP 
sources need not, it is possible for UDP sources to crowd out TCP traffic. A number 
R
R
Equal
bandwidth
share
Connection 1 throughput
Connection 2 throughput
D
B
C
A
Full bandwidth
utilization line
Figure 3.57  ♦  Throughput realized by TCP connections 1 and 2

3.8    •    Evolution of Transport-Layer Functionality         309
of congestion-control mechanisms have been proposed for the Internet that prevent 
UDP traffic from bringing the Internet’s throughput to a grinding halt [Floyd 1999; 
Floyd 2000; Kohler 2006; RFC 4340].
Fairness and Parallel TCP Connections
But even if we could force UDP traffic to behave fairly, the fairness problem would 
still not be completely solved. This is because there is nothing to stop a TCP-based 
application from using multiple parallel connections. For example, Web browsers 
often use multiple parallel TCP connections to transfer the multiple objects within 
a Web page. (The exact number of multiple connections is configurable in most 
browsers.) When an application uses multiple parallel connections, it gets a larger 
fraction of the bandwidth in a congested link. As an example, consider a link of rate 
R supporting nine ongoing client-server applications, with each of the applications 
using one TCP connection. If a new application comes along and also uses one TCP 
connection, then each application gets approximately the same transmission rate of 
R/10. But if this new application instead uses 11 parallel TCP connections, then the 
new application gets an unfair allocation of more than R/2. Because Web traffic is so 
pervasive in the Internet, multiple parallel connections are not uncommon.
3.8	 Evolution of Transport-Layer Functionality
Our discussion of specific Internet transport protocols in this chapter has focused on 
UDP and TCP—the two “work horses” of the Internet transport layer. However, as 
we’ve seen, three decades of experience with these two protocols has identified cir-
cumstances in which neither is ideally suited, and so the design and implementation 
of transport layer functionality has continued to evolve.
We’ve seen a rich evolution in the use of TCP over the past decade. In 
­Sections 3.7.1 and 3.7.2, we learned that in addition to “classic” versions of TCP 
such as TCP Tahoe and Reno, there are now several newer versions of TCP that have 
been developed, implemented, deployed, and are in significant use today. These 
include TCP CUBIC, DCTCP, CTCP, BBR, and more. Indeed, measurements in 
[Yang 2014] indicate that CUBIC (and its predecessor, BIC [Xu 2004]) and CTCP 
are more widely deployed on Web servers than classic TCP Reno; we also saw that 
BBR is being deployed in Google’s internal B4 network, as well as on many of 
Google’s public-facing servers.
And there are many (many!) more versions of TCP! There are versions of TCP 
specifically designed for use over wireless links, over high-bandwidth paths with 
large RTTs, for paths with packet re-ordering, and for short paths strictly within data 
centers. There are versions of TCP that implement different priorities among TCP 

310         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
connections competing for bandwidth at a bottleneck link, and for TCP connections 
whose segments are being sent over different source-destination paths in parallel. 
There are also variations of TCP that deal with packet acknowledgment and TCP 
session establishment/closure differently than we studied in Section 3.5.6. Indeed, 
it’s probably not even correct anymore to refer to “the” TCP protocol; perhaps the 
only common features of these protocols is that they use the TCP segment format that 
we studied in Figure 3.29, and that they should compete “fairly” amongst themselves 
in the face of network congestion! For a survey of the many flavors of TCP, see 
­[Afanasyev 2010] and [Narayan 2018].
QUIC: Quick UDP Internet Connections
If the transport services needed by an application don’t quite fit either the UDP 
or TCP service models—perhaps an application needs more services than those 
provided by UDP but does not want all of the particular functionality that comes 
with TCP, or may want different services than those provided by TCP—applica-
tion designers can always “roll their own” protocol at the application layer. This 
is the approach taken in the QUIC (Quick UDP Internet Connections) protocol 
[Langley 2017, QUIC 2020]. Specifically, QUIC is a new application-layer pro-
tocol designed from the ground up to improve the performance of transport-layer 
services for secure HTTP. QUIC has already been widely deployed, although is 
still in the process of being standardized as an Internet RFC [QUIC 2020]. Google 
has deployed QUIC on many of its public-facing Web servers, in its mobile video 
streaming YouTube app, in its Chrome browser, and in Android’s Google Search 
app. With more than 7% of Internet traffic today now being QUIC [Langley 2017], 
we’ll want to take a closer look. Our study of QUIC will also serve as a nice culmi-
nation of our study of the transport layer, as QUIC uses many of the approaches for 
reliable data transfer, congestion control, and connection management that we’ve 
studied in this chapter.
As shown in Figure 3.58, QUIC is an application-layer protocol, using UDP as 
its underlying transport-layer protocol, and is designed to interface above specifi-
cally to a simplified but evolved version of HTTP/2. In the near future, HTTP/3 
will natively incorporate QUIC [HTTP/3 2020]. Some of QUIC’s major features 
include:
•	 Connection-Oriented and Secure. Like TCP, QUIC is a connection-oriented 
protocol between two endpoints. This requires a handshake between endpoints 
to  set up the QUIC connection state. Two pieces of connection state are the 
source and destination connection ID. All QUIC packets are encrypted, and as 
suggested in Figure 3.58, QUIC combines the handshakes needed to establish 
connection state with those needed for authentication and encryption (transport 
layer security topics that we’ll study in Chapter 8), thus providing faster estab-
lishment than the protocol stack in Figure 3.58(a), where multiple RTTs are 

3.8    •    Evolution of Transport-Layer Functionality         311
required to first establish a TCP connection, and then establish a TLS connection 
over the TCP connection.
•	 Streams. QUIC allows several different application-level “streams” to be mul-
tiplexed through a single QUIC connection, and once a QUIC connection is 
established, new streams can be quickly added. A stream is an abstraction for the 
reliable, in-order bi-directional delivery of data between two QUIC endpoints. In 
the context of HTTP/3, there would be a different stream  for each object in a Web 
page. Each connection has a connection ID, and each stream within a connection 
has a stream ID; both of these IDs are contained in a QUIC packet header (along 
with other header information). Data from multiple streams may be contained 
within a single QUIC segment, which is carried over UDP. The Stream Control 
Transmission Protocol (SCTP) [RFC 4960, RFC 3286] is an earlier reliable, mes-
sage-oriented protocol that pioneered the notion of multiplexing multiple appli-
cation-level “streams” through a single SCTP connection. We’ll see in Chapter 7 
that SCTP is used in  control plane protocols in 4G/5G cellular wireless networks.
•	 Reliable, TCP-friendly congestion-controlled data transfer. As illustrated 
in Figure 3.59(b), QUIC provides reliable data transfer to each QUIC stream 
separately. Figure 3.59(a) shows the case of HTTP/1.1 sending multiple HTTP 
requests, all over a single TCP connection. Since TCP provides reliable, in-order 
byte delivery, this means that the multiple HTTP requests must be delivered in-
order at the destination HTTP server. Thus, if bytes from one HTTP request are 
lost, the remaining HTTP requests can not be delivered until those lost bytes are 
retransmitted and correctly received by TCP at the HTTP server—the so-called 
HOL blocking problem that we encountered earlier in Section 2.2.5. Since QUIC 
provides a reliable in-order delivery on a per-stream basis, a lost UDP segment 
only impacts those streams whose data was carried in that segment; HTTP mes-
sages in other streams can continue to be received and delivered to the applica-
tion. QUIC provides reliable data transfer using acknowledgment mechanisms 
similar to TCP’s, as specified in [RFC 5681].
IP
TCP
TLS
HTTP/2
IP
UDP
QUIC
HTTP/2 (slimmed)
Network
Transport
Application
HTTP/3
a.
b.
Figure 3.58  ♦  (a) traditional secure HTTP protocol stack, and the 
(b) secure QUIC-based HTTP/3 protocol stack

312         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
	
QUIC’s congestion control is based on TCP NewReno [RFC 6582], a slight 
modification to the TCP Reno protocol that we studied in Section 3.7.1. QUIC’s 
Draft specification [QUIC-recovery 2020] notes “Readers familiar with TCP’s 
loss detection and congestion control will find algorithms here that parallel well-
known TCP ones.” Since we’ve carefully studied TCP’s congestion control in 
Section 3.7.1, we’d be right at home reading the details of QUIC’s draft specifica-
tion of its congestion control algorithm!
In closing, it’s worth highlighting again that QUIC is an application-layer 
­protocol providing reliable, congestion-controlled data transfer between two 
­endpoints. The authors of QUIC [Langley 2017] stress that this means that changes 
can be made to QUIC at “application-update timescales,” that is, much faster than 
TCP or UDP update timescales.
3.9	 Summary
We began this chapter by studying the services that a transport-layer protocol can 
provide to network applications. At one extreme, the transport-layer protocol can be 
very simple and offer a no-frills service to applications, providing only a multiplexing/
demultiplexing function for communicating processes. The Internet’s UDP ­protocol 
TLS encryption 
TCP RDT
TCP CC
TCP RDT
TCP CC
TLS encryption 
HTTP
request
HTTP
request
HTTP
request
QUIC congestion control 
QUIC
encryption
QUIC
encryption
QUIC
encryption
QUIC RDT
QUIC RDT
QUIC RDT
HTTP
request
HTTP
request
HTTP
request
QUIC congestion control 
QUIC
encryption
QUIC
encryption
QUIC
encryption
QUIC RDT
QUIC RDT
QUIC RDT
UDP
UDP
Transport
Application
a.  HTTP 1.1
b.  HTTP/3
HTTP
request
HTTP
request
HTTP
request
HTTP
request
HTTP
request
HTTP
request
Figure 3.59  ♦  (a) HTTP/1.1: a single-connection client and server using application-level TLS 
encryption over TCP’s reliable data transfer (RDT) and congestion control (CC) 
(b) HTTP/3: a ­multi-stream client and server using QUIC’s encryption, reliable 
data transfer and congestion ­control over UDP’s unreliable datagram service

3.9    •    Summary         313
is an example of such a no-frills transport-layer protocol. At the other extreme, a 
­transport-layer ­protocol can provide a variety of guarantees to applications, such as 
reliable delivery of data, delay guarantees, and bandwidth guarantees. Nevertheless, 
the services that a transport protocol can provide are often constrained by the service 
model of the underlying network-layer protocol. If the network-layer protocol cannot 
provide delay or bandwidth guarantees to transport-layer segments, then the transport-
layer protocol cannot provide delay or bandwidth guarantees for the messages sent 
between processes.
We learned in Section 3.4 that a transport-layer protocol can provide reliable 
data transfer even if the underlying network layer is unreliable. We saw that provid-
ing reliable data transfer has many subtle points, but that the task can be accom-
plished by carefully combining acknowledgments, timers, retransmissions, and 
sequence numbers.
Although we covered reliable data transfer in this chapter, we should keep 
in mind that reliable data transfer can be provided by link-, network-, transport-, 
or application-layer protocols. Any of the upper four layers of the protocol 
stack can implement acknowledgments, timers, retransmissions, and sequence 
numbers and provide reliable data transfer to the layer above. In fact, over 
the years, engineers and computer scientists have independently designed and 
implemented link-, network-, transport-, and application-layer protocols that 
provide reliable data transfer (although many of these protocols have quietly 
disappeared).
In Section 3.5, we took a close look at TCP, the Internet’s connection-oriented 
and reliable transport-layer protocol. We learned that TCP is complex, involving con-
nection management, flow control, and round-trip time estimation, as well as reli-
able data transfer. In fact, TCP is actually more complex than our description—we 
intentionally did not discuss a variety of TCP patches, fixes, and improvements that 
are widely implemented in various versions of TCP. All of this complexity, however, 
is hidden from the network application. If a client on one host wants to send data 
reliably to a server on another host, it simply opens a TCP socket to the server and 
pumps data into that socket. The client-server application is blissfully unaware of 
TCP’s complexity.
In Section 3.6, we examined congestion control from a broad perspective, and 
in Section 3.7, we showed how TCP implements congestion control. We learned that 
congestion control is imperative for the well-being of the network. Without conges-
tion control, a network can easily become gridlocked, with little or no data being 
transported end-to-end. In Section 3.7, we learned that classic TCP implements an 
end-to-end congestion-control mechanism that additively increases its transmission 
rate when the TCP connection’s path is judged to be congestion-free, and multiplica-
tively decreases its transmission rate when loss occurs. This mechanism also strives 
to give each TCP connection passing through a congested link an equal share of the 
link bandwidth. We also studied several newer variations of TCP congestion control 

314         CHAPTER 3    •    TRANSPORT LAYER
that try to determine TCP’s sending rate rate more quickly than classic TCP, use a 
delay-based approach or explicit congestion notification from the network (rather 
than a loss-based approach) to determine TCP’s sending rate. We also examined in 
some depth the impact of TCP connection establishment and slow start on latency. 
We observed that in many important scenarios, connection establishment and slow 
start significantly contribute to end-to-end delay. We emphasize once more that 
while TCP congestion control has evolved over the years, it remains an area of 
intensive research and will likely continue to evolve in the upcoming years. To 
wrap up this chapter, in Section 3.8, we studied recent developments in implement-
ing many of the transport layer’s functions—reliable data transfer, congestion con-
trol, connection establishment, and more—in the application layer using the QUIC 
protocol.
In Chapter 1, we said that a computer network can be partitioned into the 
­“network edge” and the “network core.” The network edge covers everything 
that happens in the end systems. Having now covered the application layer and 
the t­ransport layer, our discussion of the network edge is complete. It is time to 
explore the network core! This journey begins in the next two chapters, where 
we’ll study the network layer, and continues into Chapter 6, where we’ll study the 
link layer.
Homework Problems and Questions


===== SECTION 2.4: 2.4 Ghz =====

802.11 g
2003
54 Mbps
30 m


===== SECTION 2.4: 2.4 Ghz =====

802.11 n (WiFi 4)
2009
600
70 m
2.4, 5 Ghz
802.11 ac (WiFi 5)
2013
3.47 Gpbs
70 m
5 Ghz
802.11 ax (WiFi 6)
2020 (expected)
14 Gbps
70 m
2.4, 5 Ghz
802.11 af
2014
35–560 Mbps
1 Km
unused TV bands (54–790 MHz)
802.11 ah
2017
347 Mbps
1 Km
900 Mhz
Table 7.1  ♦  Summary of IEEE 802.11 standards

574         CHAPTER 7    •    WIRELESS AND MOBILE NETWORKS
[Diggavi 2004]. 802.11ac and 802.11 ax base stations may transmit to multiple sta-
tions simultaneously, and use “smart” antennas to adaptively beamform to target 
transmissions in the direction of a receiver. This decreases interference and increases 
the distance reached at a given data rate. The data rates shown in Table 7.1 are 
for an idealized environment, for example, a receiver close to the base station, with no 
­interference—a scenario that we’re unlikely to experience in practice! So as the say-
ing goes, YMMV: Your Mileage (or in this case your wireless data rate) May Vary.
7.3.1	The 802.11 Wireless LAN Architecture
Figure 7.7 illustrates the principal components of the 802.11 wireless LAN architec-
ture. The fundamental building block of the 802.11 architecture is the basic service 
set (BSS). A BSS contains one or more wireless stations and a central base station, 
known as an access point (AP) in 802.11 parlance. Figure 7.7 shows the AP in each 
of two BSSs connecting to an interconnection device (such as a switch or router), 
which in turn leads to the Internet. In a typical home network, there is one AP and one 
router (typically integrated together as one unit) that connects the BSS to the Internet.
As with Ethernet devices, each 802.11 wireless station has a 6-byte MAC address 
that is stored in the firmware of the station’s adapter (that is, 802.11 network interface 
card). Each AP also has a MAC address for its wireless interface. As with Ethernet, 
these MAC addresses are administered by IEEE and are (in theory) ­globally unique.
As noted in Section 7.1, wireless LANs that deploy APs are often referred to as 
infrastructure wireless LANs, with the “infrastructure” being the APs along with the 
Figure 7.7  ♦  IEEE 802.11 LAN architecture
Internet
Switch or router
AP
BSS 1
BSS 2
AP

7.3    •    WiFi: 802.11 Wireless LANs         575
wired Ethernet infrastructure that interconnects the APs and a router. Figure 7.8 shows 
that IEEE 802.11 stations can also group themselves together to form an ad hoc net-
work—a network with no central control and with no connections to the ­“outside world.” 
Here, the network is formed “on the fly,” by mobile devices that have found themselves 
in proximity to each other, that have a need to communicate, and that find no preexist-
ing network infrastructure in their location. An ad hoc network might be formed when 
people with laptops get together (e.g., in a conference room, a train, or a car) and want 
to exchange data in the absence of a centralized AP. There has been tremendous interest 
in ad hoc networking, as communicating portable devices continue to proliferate. In this 
section, though, we’ll focus our attention on infrastructure wireless LANs.
Channels and Association
In 802.11, each wireless station needs to associate with an AP before it can send or 
receive network-layer data. Although all of the 802.11 standards use association, 
we’ll discuss this topic specifically in the context of IEEE 802.11b, g, n, ac, ax.
When a network administrator installs an AP, the administrator assigns a one- 
or two-word Service Set Identifier (SSID) to the access point. (When you choose 
Wi-Fi under Setting on your iPhone, for example, a list is displayed showing the 
SSID of each AP in range.) The administrator must also assign a channel number 
to the AP. To understand channel numbers, recall that 802.11 operates in the fre-
quency range of 2.4 GHz to 2.4835 GHz. Within this 85 MHz band, 802.11 defines 
11 partially overlapping channels. Any two channels are non-overlapping if and 
only if they are separated by four or more channels. In particular, the set of chan-
nels 1, 6, and 11 is the only set of three non-overlapping channels. This means that 
an administrator could create a wireless LAN with an aggregate maximum trans-
mission rate of three times the maximum transmission rate shown in Table 7.1 by 
installing three 802.11 APs at the same physical location, assigning channels 1, 6, 
and 11 to the APs, and interconnecting each of the APs with a switch.
Figure 7.8  ♦  An IEEE 802.11 ad hoc network
BSS

576         CHAPTER 7    •    WIRELESS AND MOBILE NETWORKS
Now that we have a basic understanding of 802.11 channels, let’s describe an 
interesting (and not completely uncommon) situation—that of a WiFi jungle. A WiFi 
jungle is any physical location where a wireless station receives a sufficiently strong 
signal from two or more APs. For example, in many cafés in New York City, a wire-
less station can pick up a signal from numerous nearby APs. One of the APs might be 
managed by the café, while the other APs might be in residential apartments near the 
café. Each of these APs would likely be located in a different IP subnet and would 
have been independently assigned a channel.
Now suppose you enter such a WiFi jungle with your smartphone, tablet, or 
­laptop, seeking wireless Internet access and a blueberry muffin. Suppose there are 
five APs in the WiFi jungle. To gain Internet access, your wireless device needs to join 
exactly one of the subnets and hence needs to associate with exactly one of the APs. 
­Associating means the wireless device creates a virtual wire between itself and the 
AP. Specifically, only the associated AP will send data frames (that is, frames con-
taining data, such as a datagram) to your wireless device, and your wireless device 
will send data frames into the Internet only through the associated AP. But how does 
your wireless device associate with a particular AP? And more fundamentally, how 
does your wireless device know which APs, if any, are out there in the jungle?
The 802.11 standard requires that an AP periodically send beacon frames, each 
of which includes the AP’s SSID and MAC address. Your wireless device, know-
ing that APs are sending out beacon frames, scans the 11 channels, seeking beacon 
frames from any APs that may be out there (some of which may be transmitting 
on the same channel—it’s a jungle out there!). Having learned about available APs 
from the beacon frames, you (or your wireless device) select one of the APs for 
association.
The 802.11 standard does not specify an algorithm for selecting which of 
the available APs to associate with; that algorithm is left up to the designers of 
the 802.11 firmware and software in your wireless device. Typically, the device 
chooses the AP whose beacon frame is received with the highest signal strength. 
While a high signal strength is good (see, e.g., Figure 7.3), signal strength is not 
the only AP characteristic that will determine the performance a device receives. 
In particular, it’s possible that the selected AP may have a strong signal, but may be 
overloaded with other affiliated devices (that will need to share the wireless band-
width at that AP), while an unloaded AP is not selected due to a slightly weaker 
signal. A number of alternative ways of choosing APs have thus recently been pro-
posed [Vasudevan 2005; Nicholson 2006; Sundaresan 2006]. For an interesting and 
down-to-earth discussion of how signal strength is measured, see [Bardwell 2004].
The process of scanning channels and listening for beacon frames is known 
as passive scanning (see Figure 7.9a). A wireless device can also perform active 
scanning, by broadcasting a probe frame that will be received by all APs within the 
wireless device’s range, as shown in Figure 7.9b. APs respond to the probe request 
frame with a probe response frame. The wireless device can then choose the AP with 
which to associate from among the responding APs.

7.3    •    WiFi: 802.11 Wireless LANs         577
Figure 7.9  ♦  Active and passive scanning for access points
1
1
3
2
H1
AP 2
AP 1
BBS 1
a. Passive scanning
1. Beacon frames sent from APs
2. Association Request frame sent:
 
H1 to selected AP
3. Association Response frame sent:
 
Selected AP to H1
a. Active scanning
 
1. Probe Request frame broadcast from H1
 
2. Probes Response frame sent from APs
 
3. Association Request frame sent:
 
 
H1 to selected AP
 
4. Association Response frame sent:
 
 
Selected AP to H1
 
 
BBS 2
2
2
4
3
H1
AP 2
AP 1
BBS 1
BBS 2
1
After selecting the AP with which to associate, the wireless device sends an asso-
ciation request frame to the AP, and the AP responds with an association response 
frame. Note that this second request/response handshake is needed with active scan-
ning, since an AP responding to the initial probe request frame doesn’t know which 
of the (possibly many) responding APs the device will choose to associate with, in 
much the same way that a DHCP client can choose from among multiple DHCP 
servers (see Figure 4.21). Once associated with an AP, the device will want to join 
the subnet (in the IP addressing sense of Section 4.3.3) to which the AP belongs. 
Thus, the device will typically send a DHCP discovery message (see Figure 4.21) 
into the subnet via the AP in order to obtain an IP address on the subnet. Once the 
address is obtained, the rest of the world then views that device simply as another 
host with an IP address in that subnet.
In order to create an association with a particular AP, the wireless device may be 
required to authenticate itself to the AP. 802.11 wireless LANs provide a number of 
alternatives for authentication and access. One approach, used by many companies, is 
to permit access to a wireless network based on a device’s MAC address. A second 
approach, used by many Internet cafés, employs usernames and passwords. In both 
cases, the AP typically communicates with an authentication server, relaying informa-
tion between the wireless device and the authentication server using a protocol such as 
RADIUS [RFC 2865] or DIAMETER [RFC 6733]. Separating the authentication server 
from the AP allows one authentication server to serve many APs, centralizing the (often 
sensitive) decisions of authentication and access within the single server, and keeping 

578         CHAPTER 7    •    WIRELESS AND MOBILE NETWORKS
AP costs and complexity low. We’ll see in chapter 8 that the new IEEE 802.11i protocol 
defining security aspects of the 802.11 protocol family takes precisely this approach.
7.3.2	The 802.11 MAC Protocol
Once a wireless device is associated with an AP, it can start sending and receiving 
data frames to and from the access point. But because multiple wireless devices, or the 
AP itself may want to transmit data frames at the same time over the same channel, a 
multiple access protocol is needed to coordinate the transmissions. In the following, 
we'll refer to the devices or the AP as wireless “stations” that share the multiple access 
channel. As discussed in Chapter 6 and Section 7.2.1, broadly speaking there are three 
classes of multiple access protocols: channel partitioning (including CDMA), random 
access, and taking turns. Inspired by the huge success of Ethernet and its random 
access protocol, the designers of 802.11 chose a random access protocol for 802.11 
wireless LANs. This random access protocol is referred to as CSMA with collision 
avoidance, or more succinctly as CSMA/CA. As with Ethernet’s CSMA/CD, the 
“CSMA” in CSMA/CA stands for “carrier sense multiple access,” meaning that each 
station senses the channel before transmitting, and refrains from transmitting when the 
channel is sensed busy. Although both ­Ethernet and 802.11 use carrier-sensing ran-
dom access, the two MAC protocols have important differences. First, instead of using 
collision detection, 802.11 uses collision-avoidance techniques. Second, because of 
the relatively high bit error rates of wireless channels, 802.11 (unlike Ethernet) uses 
a link-layer acknowledgment/retransmission (ARQ) scheme. We’ll describe 802.11’s 
collision-avoidance and link-layer acknowledgment schemes below.
Recall from Sections 6.3.2 and 6.4.2 that with Ethernet’s collision-detection 
algorithm, an Ethernet station listens to the channel as it transmits. If, while transmit-
ting, it detects that another station is also transmitting, it aborts its transmission and 
tries to transmit again after waiting a small, random amount of time. Unlike the 802.3 
Ethernet protocol, the 802.11 MAC protocol does not implement collision detection. 
There are two important reasons for this:
•	 The ability to detect collisions requires the ability to send (the station’s own 
­signal) and receive (to determine whether another station is also transmitting) at 
the same time. Because the strength of the received signal is typically very small 
compared to the strength of the transmitted signal at the 802.11 adapter, it is 
costly to build hardware that can detect a collision.
•	 More importantly, even if the adapter could transmit and listen at the same time 
(and presumably abort transmission when it senses a busy channel), the adapter 
would still not be able to detect all collisions, due to the hidden terminal problem 
and fading, as discussed in Section 7.2.
Because 802.11wireless LANs do not use collision detection, once a station 
begins to transmit a frame, it transmits the frame in its entirety; that is, once a station 

7.3    •    WiFi: 802.11 Wireless LANs         579
Figure 7.10  ♦  802.11 uses link-layer acknowledgments
Destination
DIFS
SIFS
data
ack
Source
gets started, there is no turning back. As one might expect, transmitting entire frames 
(particularly long frames) when collisions are prevalent can significantly degrade a 
multiple access protocol’s performance. In order to reduce the likelihood of collisions, 
802.11 employs several collision-avoidance techniques, which we’ll shortly discuss.
Before considering collision avoidance, however, we’ll first need to examine 
802.11’s link-layer acknowledgment scheme. Recall from Section 7.2 that when a 
station in a wireless LAN sends a frame, the frame may not reach the destination sta-
tion intact for a variety of reasons. To deal with this non-negligible chance of failure, 
the 802.11 MAC protocol uses link-layer acknowledgments. As shown in Figure 7.10, 
when the destination station receives a frame that passes the CRC, it waits a short 
period of time known as the Short Inter-frame Spacing (SIFS) and then sends back 
an acknowledgment frame. If the transmitting station does not receive an acknowl-
edgment within a given amount of time, it assumes that an error has occurred and 
retransmits the frame, using the CSMA/CA protocol to access the channel. If an 
acknowledgment is not received after some fixed number of retransmissions, the trans-
mitting station gives up and discards the frame.

580         CHAPTER 7    •    WIRELESS AND MOBILE NETWORKS
Having discussed how 802.11 uses link-layer acknowledgments, we’re now in a 
position to describe the 802.11 CSMA/CA protocol. Suppose that a station (wireless 
device or an AP) has a frame to transmit.
	1.	 If initially the station senses the channel idle, it transmits its frame after a  
short period of time known as the Distributed Inter-frame Space (DIFS);  
see ­Figure 7.10.
	2.	 Otherwise, the station chooses a random backoff value using binary exponen-
tial backoff (as we encountered in Section 6.3.2) and counts down this value 
after DIFS when the channel is sensed idle. While the channel is sensed busy, 
the counter value remains frozen.
	3.	 When the counter reaches zero (note that this can only occur while the chan-
nel is sensed idle), the station transmits the entire frame and then waits for an 
acknowledgment.
	4.	 If an acknowledgment is received, the transmitting station knows that its frame 
has been correctly received at the destination station. If the station has another 
frame to send, it begins the CSMA/CA protocol at step 2. If the acknowledg-
ment isn’t received, the transmitting station reenters the backoff phase in step 2, 
with the random value chosen from a larger interval.
Recall that under Ethernet’s CSMA/CD, multiple access protocol (Section 6.3.2), 
a station begins transmitting as soon as the channel is sensed idle. With CSMA/CA, 
however, the station refrains from transmitting while counting down, even when it 
senses the channel to be idle. Why do CSMA/CD and CDMA/CA take such different 
approaches here?
To answer this question, let’s consider a scenario in which two stations each 
have a data frame to transmit, but neither station transmits immediately because each 
senses that a third station is already transmitting. With Ethernet’s CSMA/CD, the 
two stations would each transmit as soon as they detect that the third station has 
finished transmitting. This would cause a collision, which isn’t a serious issue in 
CSMA/CD, since both stations would abort their transmissions and thus avoid the 
useless transmissions of the remainders of their frames. In 802.11, however, the situ-
ation is quite different. Because 802.11 does not detect a collision and abort trans-
mission, a frame suffering a collision will be transmitted in its entirety. The goal 
in 802.11 is thus to avoid collisions whenever possible. In 802.11, if the two sta-
tions sense the channel busy, they both immediately enter random backoff, hopefully 
choosing different backoff values. If these values are indeed different, once the chan-
nel becomes idle, one of the two stations will begin transmitting before the other, and 
(if the two stations are not hidden from each other) the “losing station” will hear the 
“winning station’s” signal, freeze its counter, and refrain from transmitting until the 
winning station has completed its transmission. In this manner, a costly collision is 
avoided. Of course, collisions can still occur with 802.11 in this scenario: The two 
stations could be hidden from each other, or the two stations could choose random 

7.3    •    WiFi: 802.11 Wireless LANs         581
backoff values that are close enough that the transmission from the station starting 
first have yet to reach the second station. Recall that we encountered this problem 
earlier in our discussion of random access algorithms in the context of Figure 6.12.
Dealing with Hidden Terminals: RTS and CTS
The 802.11 MAC protocol also includes a nifty (but optional) reservation scheme 
that helps avoid collisions even in the presence of hidden terminals. Let’s investi-
gate this scheme in the context of Figure 7.11, which shows two wireless ­stations 
and one access point. Both of the wireless stations are within range of the AP 
(whose ­coverage is shown as a shaded circle) and both have associated with the AP. 
­However, due to fading, the signal ranges of wireless stations are limited to the inte-
riors of the shaded circles shown in Figure 7.11. Thus, each of the wireless stations 
is hidden from the other, although neither is hidden from the AP.
Let’s now consider why hidden terminals can be problematic. Suppose Station H1 is 
transmitting a frame and halfway through H1’s transmission, Station H2 wants to send a 
frame to the AP. H2, not hearing the transmission from H1, will first wait a DIFS interval 
and then transmit the frame, resulting in a collision. The channel will therefore be wasted 
during the entire period of H1’s transmission as well as during H2’s transmission.
In order to avoid this problem, the IEEE 802.11 protocol allows a station to 
use a short Request to Send (RTS) control frame and a short Clear to Send (CTS) 
control frame to reserve access to the channel. When a sender wants to send a DATA 
frame, it can first send an RTS frame to the AP, indicating the total time required 
to transmit the DATA frame and the acknowledgment (ACK) frame. When the AP 
receives the RTS frame, it responds by broadcasting a CTS frame. This CTS frame 
Figure 7.11  ♦  Hidden terminal example: H1 is hidden from H2, and  
vice versa
AP
H1
H2

582         CHAPTER 7    •    WIRELESS AND MOBILE NETWORKS
serves two purposes: It gives the sender explicit permission to send and also instructs 
the other stations not to send for the reserved duration.
Thus, in Figure 7.12, before transmitting a DATA frame, H1 first broadcasts an RTS 
frame, which is heard by all stations in its circle, including the AP. The AP then responds 
with a CTS frame, which is heard by all stations within its range, including H1 and H2. 
Station H2, having heard the CTS, refrains from transmitting for the time specified in the 
CTS frame. The RTS, CTS, DATA, and ACK frames are shown in Figure 7.12.
Figure 7.12  ♦  Collision avoidance using the RTS and CTS frames
Destination
All other nodes
Defer access
Source
DIFS
ACK
SIFS
SIFS
SIFS
DATA
CTS
CTS
ACK
RTS

7.3    •    WiFi: 802.11 Wireless LANs         583
The use of the RTS and CTS frames can improve performance in two important 
ways:
•	 The hidden station problem is mitigated, since a long DATA frame is transmitted 
only after the channel has been reserved.
•	 Because the RTS and CTS frames are short, a collision involving an RTS or CTS 
frame will last only for the duration of the short RTS or CTS frame. Once the RTS 
and CTS frames are correctly transmitted, the following DATA and ACK frames 
should be transmitted without collisions.
You are encouraged to check out the 802.11 animation in the textbook’s Web site. 
This interactive animation illustrates the CSMA/CA protocol, including the RTS/
CTS exchange sequence.
Although the RTS/CTS exchange can help reduce collisions, it also introduces 
delay and consumes channel resources. For this reason, the RTS/CTS exchange is 
only used (if at all) to reserve the channel for the transmission of a long DATA 
frame. In practice, each wireless station can set an RTS threshold such that the RTS/
CTS sequence is used only when the frame is longer than the threshold. For many 
wireless stations, the default RTS threshold value is larger than the maximum frame 
length, so the RTS/CTS sequence is skipped for all DATA frames sent.
Using 802.11 as a Point-to-Point Link
Our discussion so far has focused on the use of 802.11 in a multiple access setting. We 
should mention that if two nodes each have a directional antenna, they can point their 
directional antennas at each other and run the 802.11 protocol over what is essentially 
a point-to-point link. Given the low cost of commodity 802.11 hardware, the use of 
directional antennas and an increased transmission power allow 802.11 to be used as an 
inexpensive means of providing wireless point-to-point connections over tens of kilo-
meters distance. [Raman 2007] describes one of the first such multi-hop wireless net-
works, operating in the rural Ganges plains in India using point-to-point 802.11 links.
7.3.3	The IEEE 802.11 Frame
Although the 802.11 frame shares many similarities with an Ethernet frame, it also con-
tains a number of fields that are specific to its use for wireless links. The 802.11 frame 
is shown in Figure 7.13. The numbers above each of the fields in the frame represent 
the lengths of the fields in bytes; the numbers above each of the subfields in the frame 
control field represent the lengths of the subfields in bits. Let’s now examine the fields 
in the frame as well as some of the more important subfields in the frame’s control field.
Payload and CRC Fields
At the heart of the frame is the payload, which typically consists of an IP datagram 
or an ARP packet. Although the field is permitted to be as long as 2,312 bytes, it is 

584         CHAPTER 7    •    WIRELESS AND MOBILE NETWORKS
typically fewer than 1,500 bytes, holding an IP datagram or an ARP packet. As with 
an Ethernet frame, an 802.11 frame includes a 32-bit cyclic redundancy check (CRC) 
so that the receiver can detect bit errors in the received frame. As we’ve seen, bit 
errors are much more common in wireless LANs than in wired LANs, so the CRC is 
even more useful here.
Address Fields
Perhaps the most striking difference in the 802.11 frame is that it has four address 
fields, each of which can hold a 6-byte MAC address. But why four address 
fields? Doesn’t a source MAC field and destination MAC field suffice, as they do 
for ­Ethernet? It turns out that three address fields are needed for internetworking 
­purposes—specifically, for moving the network-layer datagram from a wireless sta-
tion through an AP to a router interface. The fourth address field is used when APs 
­forward frames to each other in ad hoc mode. Since we are only considering infra-
structure networks here, let’s focus our attention on the first three address fields. The 
802.11 standard defines these fields as follows:
•	 Address 2 is the MAC address of the station that transmits the frame. Thus, if a 
wireless station transmits the frame, that station’s MAC address is inserted in the 
address 2 field. Similarly, if an AP transmits the frame, the AP’s MAC address is 
inserted in the address 2 field.
•	 Address 1 is the MAC address of the wireless station that is to receive the frame. 
Thus if a mobile wireless station transmits the frame, address 1 contains the MAC 
address of the destination AP. Similarly, if an AP transmits the frame, address 1 
contains the MAC address of the destination wireless station.
•	 To understand address 3, recall that the BSS (consisting of the AP and wireless 
stations) is part of a subnet, and that this subnet connects to other subnets via some 
router interface. Address 3 contains the MAC address of this router ­interface.
Figure 7.13  ♦  The 802.11 frame
Frame
control
2
2
2
4
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
6
6
6
2
6
0-2312
4
Frame (numbers indicate ﬁeld length in bytes):
Address
1
Duration
Payload
CRC
Protocol
version
To
AP
From
AP
More
frag
Power
mgt
More
data
Address
2
Address
3
Address
4
Seq
control
Type
Subtype
Retry
WEP
Rsvd
Frame control ﬁeld expanded (numbers indicate ﬁeld length in bits):

7.3    •    WiFi: 802.11 Wireless LANs         585
To gain further insight into the purpose of address 3, let’s walk through an inter-
networking example in the context of Figure 7.14. In this figure, there are two APs, 
each of which is responsible for a number of wireless stations. Each of the APs has a 
direct connection to a router, which in turn connects to the global Internet. We should 
keep in mind that an AP is a link-layer device, and thus neither “speaks” IP nor 
understands IP addresses. Consider now moving a datagram from the router interface 
R1 to the wireless Station H1. The router is not aware that there is an AP between it 
and H1; from the router’s perspective, H1 is just a host in one of the subnets to which 
it (the router) is connected.
•	 The router, which knows the IP address of H1 (from the destination address of the 
datagram), uses ARP to determine the MAC address of H1, just as in an ordinary Eth-
ernet LAN. After obtaining H1’s MAC address, router interface R1 encapsulates the 
datagram within an Ethernet frame. The source address field of this frame contains 
R1’s MAC address, and the destination address field contains H1’s MAC address.
•	 When the Ethernet frame arrives at the AP, the AP converts the 802.3 Ethernet 
frame to an 802.11 frame before transmitting the frame into the wireless chan-
nel. The AP fills in address 1 and address 2 with H1’s MAC address and its own 
MAC address, respectively, as described above. For address 3, the AP inserts the 
MAC address of R1. In this manner, H1 can determine (from address 3) the MAC 
address of the router interface that sent the datagram into the subnet.
Figure 7.14  ♦  The use of address fields in 802.11 frames: Sending frames 
between H1 and R1
Internet
Router
AP
H1
R1
BSS 1
BSS 2
AP

586         CHAPTER 7    •    WIRELESS AND MOBILE NETWORKS
Now consider what happens when the wireless station H1 responds by moving a 
datagram from H1 to R1.
•	 H1 creates an 802.11 frame, filling the fields for address 1 and address 2 with the 
AP’s MAC address and H1’s MAC address, respectively, as described above. For 
address 3, H1 inserts R1’s MAC address.
•	 When the AP receives the 802.11 frame, it converts the frame to an Ethernet frame. 
The source address field for this frame is H1’s MAC address, and the destination 
address field is R1’s MAC address. Thus, address 3 allows the AP to determine 
the appropriate destination MAC address when constructing the Ethernet frame.
In summary, address 3 plays a crucial role for internetworking the BSS with a wired 
LAN.
Sequence Number, Duration, and Frame Control Fields
Recall that in 802.11, whenever a station correctly receives a frame from another sta-
tion, it sends back an acknowledgment. Because acknowledgments can get lost, the 
sending station may send multiple copies of a given frame. As we saw in our discus-
sion of the rdt2.1 protocol (Section 3.4.1), the use of sequence numbers allows the 
receiver to distinguish between a newly transmitted frame and the retransmission of 
a previous frame. The sequence number field in the 802.11 frame thus serves exactly 
the same purpose here at the link layer as it did in the transport layer in Chapter 3.
Recall that the 802.11 protocol allows a transmitting station to reserve the chan-
nel for a period of time that includes the time to transmit its data frame and the time 
to transmit an acknowledgment. This duration value is included in the frame’s dura-
tion field (both for data frames and for the RTS and CTS frames).
As shown in Figure 7.13, the frame control field includes many subfields. We’ll 
say just a few words about some of the more important subfields; for a more complete 
discussion, you are encouraged to consult the 802.11 specification [Held 2001; Crow 
1997; IEEE 802.11 1999]. The type and subtype fields are used to distinguish the asso-
ciation, RTS, CTS, ACK, and data frames. The to and from fields are used to define 
the meanings of the different address fields. (These meanings change depending on 
whether ad hoc or infrastructure modes are used and, in the case of infrastructure 
mode, whether a wireless station or an AP is sending the frame.) Finally the WEP field 
indicates whether encryption is being used or not (WEP is discussed in Chapter 8).
7.3.4	Mobility in the Same IP Subnet
In order to increase the physical range of a wireless LAN, companies and universities 
will often deploy multiple BSSs within the same IP subnet. This naturally raises the issue 
of mobility among the BSSs—how do wireless stations seamlessly move from one BSS 
to another while maintaining ongoing TCP sessions? As we’ll see in this subsection, 
mobility can be handled in a relatively straightforward manner when the BSSs are part 

7.3    •    WiFi: 802.11 Wireless LANs         587
of the subnet. When stations move between subnets, more sophisticated mobility man-
agement protocols will be needed, such as those we’ll study in Sections 7.5 and 7.6.
Let’s now look at a specific example of mobility between BSSs in the same sub-
net. Figure 7.15 shows two interconnected BSSs with a host, H1, moving from BSS1 
to BSS2. Because in this example the interconnection device that connects the two 
BSSs is not a router, all of the stations in the two BSSs, including the APs, belong 
to the same IP subnet. Thus, when H1 moves from BSS1 to BSS2, it may keep its IP 
address and all of its ongoing TCP connections. If the interconnection device were a 
router, then H1 would have to obtain a new IP address in the subnet in which it was 
moving. This address change would disrupt (and eventually terminate) any on-going 
TCP connections at H1. In Section 7.6, we’ll see how a network-layer mobility pro-
tocol, such as mobile IP, can be used to avoid this problem.
But what specifically happens when H1 moves from BSS1 to BSS2? As H1 wanders 
away from AP1, H1 detects a weakening signal from AP1 and starts to scan for a stronger 
signal. H1 receives beacon frames from AP2 (which in many corporate and university 
settings will have the same SSID as AP1). H1 then disassociates with AP1 and associates 
with AP2, while keeping its IP address and maintaining its ongoing TCP sessions.
This addresses the handover problem from the host and AP viewpoint. But what 
about the switch in Figure 7.15? How does it know that the host has moved from one 
AP to another? As you may recall from Chapter 6, switches are “self-learning” and 
automatically build their forwarding tables. This self-learning feature nicely handles 
occasional moves (for example, when an employee gets transferred from one depart-
ment to another); however, switches were not designed to support highly mobile 
users who want to maintain TCP connections while moving between BSSs. To 
appreciate the problem here, recall that before the move, the switch has an entry in 
its forwarding table that pairs H1’s MAC address with the outgoing switch interface 
through which H1 can be reached. If H1 is initially in BSS1, then a datagram des-
tined to H1 will be directed to H1 via AP1. Once H1 associates with BSS2, however, 
its frames should be directed to AP2. One solution (a bit of a hack, really) is for AP2 
to send a broadcast Ethernet frame with H1’s source address to the switch just after 
Figure 7.15  ♦  Mobility in the same subnet
BSS 1
BSS 2
H1
Switch
AP 1
AP 2

588         CHAPTER 7    •    WIRELESS AND MOBILE NETWORKS
the new association. When the switch receives the frame, it updates its forwarding 
table, allowing H1 to be reached via AP2. The 802.11f standards group is developing 
an inter-AP protocol to handle these and related issues.
Our discussion above has focused on mobility with the same LAN subnet. Recall 
that VLANs, which we studied in Section 6.4.4, can be used to connect together 
islands of LANs into a large virtual LAN that can span a large geographical region. 
Mobility among base stations within such a VLAN can be handled in exactly the 
same manner as above [Yu 2011].
LOCATION DISCOVERY: GPS AND WIFI POSITIONING
Many of the most useful and important smartphone apps today are location-based 
mobile apps, including Foursquare, Yelp, Uber, Pokémon Go, and Waze. These 
­software apps all make use of an API that allows them to extract their current geographi-
cal position directly from the smartphone. Have you ever wondered how your smart-
phone obtains its geographical position? Today, it is done by combining two systems, the 
Global Positioning System (GPS) and the WiFi Positioning System (WPS).
The GPS, with a constellation of 30+ satellites, broadcasts satellite location and 
timing information, which in turn is used by each GPS receiver to estimate its geoloca-
tion. The United States government created the system, maintains it, and makes it freely 
accessible to anyone with a GPS receiver. The satellites have very stable atomic clocks 
that are synchronized with one another and with ground clocks. The satellites also know 
their locations with great precision. Each GPS satellite continuously broadcasts a radio 
signal containing its current time and position. If a GPS receiver obtains this information 
from at least four satellites, it can solve triangulation equations to estimate its position.
GPS, however, cannot always provide accurate geolocations if it does not have 
line-of-sight with at least four GPS satellites or when there is interference from other 
high-frequency communication systems. This is particularly true in urban environments, 
where tall buildings frequently block GPS signals. This is where WiFi positioning 
­systems come to the rescue. WiFi positioning systems make use of databases of WiFi 
access points, which are independently maintained by various Internet companies, 
including Google, Apple, and Microsoft. Each database contains information about 
millions of WiFi access points, including each access point’s SSID and an estimate of 
its geographic location. To understand how a WiFi positioning system makes use of 
such a database, consider an Android smartphone along with the Google location ser-
vice. From each nearby access point, the smartphone receives and measures the signal  
strength of beacon signals (see Section 7.3.1), which contain the access point’s SSID. The  
smartphone can therefore continually send messages to the Google location service  
(in the cloud) that include the SSIDs of nearby access points and the corresponding 
signal strengths. It will also send its GPS position (obtained via the satellite broadcast 
CASE HISTORY

7.3    •    WiFi: 802.11 Wireless LANs         589
signals, as described above) when available. Using the signal-strength information, 
Google will estimate the distance between the smartphone and each of the WiFi 
access points. Leveraging these estimated distances, it can then solve triangulation 
equations to estimate the smartphone’s geolocation. Finally, this WiFi-based estimate is 
combined with the GPS satellite-based estimate to form an aggregate estimate, which 
is then sent back to the smartphone and used by the location-based mobile apps.
But you may still be wondering how Google (and Apple, Microsoft, and so on) 
obtain and maintain the database of access points, and in particular, the access 
point’s geographic location? Recall that for a given access point, every nearby 
Android smartphone will send to the Google location service the strength of the 
­signal received from the access point as well as the smartphone’s estimated location. 
Given that thousands of smartphones may be passing by the access point during any 
single day, Google’s location service will have lots of data at its disposition to use in 
estimating the access point’s position, again by solving triangulation equations. Thus, 
the access points help the smartphones determine their locations, and in turn the 
smartphones help the access points determine their locations!
7.3.5	Advanced Features in 802.11
We’ll wrap up our coverage of 802.11 with a short discussion of two advanced capabili-
ties found in 802.11 networks. As we’ll see, these capabilities are not completely speci-
fied in the 802.11 standard, but rather are made possible by mechanisms specified in 
the standard. This allows different vendors to implement these capabilities using their 
own (proprietary) approaches, presumably giving them an edge over the competition.
802.11 Rate Adaptation
We saw earlier in Figure 7.3 that different modulation techniques (with the different 
transmission rates that they provide) are appropriate for different SNR scenarios. 
Consider, for example, a mobile 802.11 user who is initially 20 meters away from 
the base station, with a high signal-to-noise ratio. Given the high SNR, the user can 
communicate with the base station using a physical-layer modulation technique that 
provides high transmission rates while maintaining a low BER. This is one happy 
user! Suppose now that the user becomes mobile, walking away from the base sta-
tion, with the SNR falling as the distance from the base station increases. In this case, 
if the modulation technique used in the 802.11 protocol operating between the base 
station and the user does not change, the BER will become unacceptably high as the 
SNR decreases, and eventually no transmitted frames will be received correctly.
For this reason, some 802.11 implementations have a rate adaptation capability 
that adaptively selects the underlying physical-layer modulation technique to use 
based on current or recent channel characteristics. If a node sends two frames in a 
row without receiving an acknowledgment (an implicit indication of bit errors on 

590         CHAPTER 7    •    WIRELESS AND MOBILE NETWORKS
the channel), the transmission rate falls back to the next lower rate. If 10 frames 
in a row are acknowledged, or if a timer that tracks the time since the last fallback 
expires, the transmission rate increases to the next higher rate. This rate adapta-
tion mechanism shares the same “probing” philosophy as TCP’s congestion-control 
mechanism—when conditions are good (reflected by ACK receipts), the transmis-
sion rate is increased until something “bad” happens (the lack of ACK receipts); 
when something “bad” happens, the transmission rate is reduced. 802.11 rate adapta-
tion and TCP congestion control are thus similar to the young child who is constantly 
pushing his/her parents for more and more (say candy for a young child, later curfew 
hours for the teenager) until the parents finally say “Enough!” and the child backs 
off (only to try again later after conditions have hopefully improved!). A number 
of other schemes have also been proposed to improve on this basic automatic rate-
adjustment scheme [Kamerman 1997; Holland 2001; Lacage 2004].
Power Management
Power is a precious resource in mobile devices, and thus the 802.11 standard provides 
power-management capabilities that allow 802.11 nodes to minimize the amount of time 
that their sense, transmit, and receive functions and other circuitry need to be “on.” 802.11 
power management operates as follows. A node is able to explicitly alternate between 
sleep and wake states (not unlike a sleepy student in a classroom!). A node indicates to 
the access point that it will be going to sleep by setting the power-management bit in the 
header of an 802.11 frame to 1. A timer in the node is then set to wake up the node just 
before the AP is scheduled to send its beacon frame (recall that an AP typically sends a 
beacon frame every 100 msec). Since the AP knows from the set power-transmission bit 
that the node is going to sleep, it (the AP) knows that it should not send any frames to 
that node, and will buffer any frames destined for the sleeping host for later transmission.
A node will wake up just before the AP sends a beacon frame, and quickly enter the 
fully active state (unlike the sleepy student, this wakeup requires only 250 microseconds 
[Kamerman 1997]!). The beacon frames sent out by the AP contain a list of nodes whose 
frames have been buffered at the AP. If there are no buffered frames for the node, it can 
go back to sleep. Otherwise, the node can explicitly request that the buffered frames be 
sent by sending a polling message to the AP. With an inter-beacon time of 100 msec, a 
wakeup time of 250 microseconds, and a similarly small time to receive a beacon frame 
and check to ensure that there are no buffered frames, a node that has no frames to send 
or receive can be asleep 99% of the time, resulting in a significant energy savings.
7.3.6	Personal Area Networks: Bluetooth*
Bluetooth networks seem to have quickly become part of everyday life. Perhaps 
you’ve used a Bluetooth network as a “cable replacement” technology to interconnect 
*The terms used below may differ from the terms found in the official Bluetooth Specification. The terms used in the official specifica-
tion DO NOT align with Pearson’s commitment to promoting diversity, equality, and inclusion, and protecting against bias and stereo-
typing in the global population of the learners we serve.

7.3    •    WiFi: 802.11 Wireless LANs         591
your computer with a wireless keyboard, mouse, or other peripheral device. Or per-
haps you’ve used a Bluetooth network to connect your wireless earbuds, speaker, 
watch, or health monitoring band to your smartphone or to connect your smartphone 
to a car’s audio system. In all of these cases, Bluetooth operates over short ranges (tens 
of meters or less), at low power, and at low cost. For this reason, Bluetooth networks 
are sometimes referred to as wireless personal area networks (WPANs) or piconets.
Although Bluetooth networks are small and relatively simple by design, they’re 
packed with many of the link-level networking techniques that we’ve studied earlier 
including time division multiplexing (TDM) and frequency division (Section 6.3.1), 
randomized backoff (Section 6.3.2), polling (Section 6.3.3), error detection and cor-
rection (Section 6.2), reliable data transfer via ACKs and NAKS (Section 3.4.1). And 
that’s just considering Bluetooth’s link layer!
Bluetooth networks operate in the unlicensed 2.4 GHz Industrial, Scientific 
and Medical (ISM) radio band along with other home appliances such as micro-
waves, garage door openers, and cordless phones. As a result, Bluetooth networks 
are designed explicitly with noise and interference in mind. The Bluetooth wire-
less channel is operated in a TDM manner, with time slots of 625 microseconds. 
During each time slot, a sender transmits on one of 79 channels, with the channel 
(frequency) changing in a known but pseudo-random manner from slot to slot. This 
form of channel hopping, known as frequency-hopping spread spectrum (FHSS), 
is used so that interference from another device or appliance operating in the ISM 
band will only interfere with Bluetooth communications in at most a subset of the 
slots. Bluetooth data rates can reach up to 3 Mbps.
Bluetooth networks are ad hoc networks—no network infrastructure (e.g., an 
access point) is needed. Instead, Bluetooth devices must organize themselves into a 
piconet of up to eight active devices, as shown in Figure 7.16. One of these devices 
Figure 7.16  ♦  A Bluetooth piconet
Radius of
coverage
Centralized Controller
Client device
Parked device
Key:
CC
CC
C
C
C
C
P
P
P
P
P

592         CHAPTER 7    •    WIRELESS AND MOBILE NETWORKS
is designated as the centralized controller, with the remaining devices acting as ­clients. 
The centralized controller node truly rules the piconet—its clock ­determines time 
in the piconet (e.g., determines TDM slot boundaries), it determine the ­slot-to-slot 
frequency hopping sequence, it controls entry of client devices into the piconet, it 
controls the power (100 mW, 2.5mW, or 1 mW) at which client devices transmit; and 
uses polling to grant clients permission to transmit once admitted to the network. In 
addition to the active devices, there can also be up to 255 “parked” devices in the 
piconet. These parked devices are often in some form of “sleep mode” to conserve 
energy (as we saw with 802.11 power management) and will awaken periodically, 
according to the centralized controller’s schedule, to receive beacon messages from 
the centralized controller. A parked device cannot communicate until its ­status has 
been changed from parked to active by the centralized controller node.
Because Bluetooth ad hoc networks must be self-organizing, it’s worth looking 
into how they bootstrap their network structure. When a centralized controller node 
wants to form a Bluetooth network, it must first determine which other Bluetooth 
devices are within range; this is the neighbor discovery problem. The centralized 
controller does this by broadcasting a series of 32 inquiry messages, each on a dif-
ferent frequency channel, and repeats the transmission sequence for up to 128 times. 
A client device listens on its chosen frequency, hoping to hear one of the centralized 
controller’s inquiry messages on this frequency. When it hears an inquiry message, 
it backs off a random amount of time between 0 and 0.3 seconds (to avoid colli-
sions with other responding nodes, reminiscent of Ethernet’s binary backoff) and 
then responds to the centralized controller with a message containing its device ID.
Once the Bluetooth centralized controller has discovered all of the potential 
­clients within range, it then invites those clients that it wishes to join the piconet. 
This second phase is known as Bluetooth paging, and is reminiscent of 802.11 
­clients associating with a base station. Through the paging process, the centralized 
controller will inform the client of the frequency-hopping pattern to be used, and the 
sender’s clock. The centralized controller begins the paging process by again send-
ing 32 identical paging invitation messages, each now addressed to a specific client, 
but again using different frequencies, since that client has yet to learn the frequency-
hopping pattern. Once the client replies with an ACK message to the paging invita-
tion message, the centralized controller sends frequency-hopping information, clock 
synchronization information and an active member address to the client, and then 
finally polls the client, now using the frequency-hopping pattern, to ensure that the 
client is connected into the network.
In our discussion above, we have only touched on Bluetooth’s wireless net-
working. Higher level protocols provide for reliable data packet transfer, circuit-
like streaming of audio and video, changing transmission power levels, changing 
active/parked state (and other states), and more. More recent versions of Bluetooth 
have addressed low energy and security considerations. For more information about 
Bluetooth, the interested reader should consult [Bisdikian 2001, Colbach 2017, and 
Bluetooth 2020].

7.4    •    Cellular Networks: 4G and 5G         593
7.4	 Cellular Networks: 4G and 5G
In the previous section, we examined how a host can access the Internet when within 
the vicinity of an 802.11 WiFi access point (AP). But as we’ve seen, APs have small 
coverage areas, and a host certainly will not be able to associate with every AP it 
encounters. As a result, WiFi access is hardly ubiquitous for a user on the move.
By contrast, 4G cellular network access has rapidly become pervasive. A recent 
measurement study of more than one million US mobile cellular network subscribers 
found that they can find 4G signals more than 90% of the time, with download speeds 
of 20 Mbps and higher. Users of Korea’s three major cellular carriers are able to find 
a 4G signal between 95 and 99.5% of the time [Open Signal 2019]. As a result, it is 
now commonplace to stream HD videos or participate in videoconferences while on 
the move in a car, bus, or high-speed train. The ubiquity of 4G Internet access has 
also enabled myriad new IoT applications such as Internet-connected shared bike and 
scooter systems, and smartphone applications such as mobile payments (commonplace 
in China since 2018) and Internet-based messaging (WeChat, WhatsApp, and more).
The term cellular refers to the fact that the region covered by a cellular network 
is partitioned into a number of geographic coverage areas, known as cells. Each cell 
contains a base station that transmits signals to, and receives signals from, the mobile 
devices currently in its cell. The coverage area of a cell depends on many factors, includ-
ing the transmitting power of the base station, the transmitting power of the devices, 
obstructing buildings in the cell, and the height and type of the base station antennas.
In this section, we provide an overview of the current 4G and emerging 5G cellular 
networks. We’ll consider the wireless first hop between the mobile device and the 
base station, as well as the cellular carrier’s all-IP core network that connects the 
wireless first hop into the carrier’s network, other carrier networks, and the larger 
Internet. Perhaps surprisingly (given the origins of mobile cellular networks in the 
telephony world, which had a very different network architecture from the Internet), 
we’ll encounter many of the architectural principles in 4G networks that we encoun-
tered in our Internet-focused studies in Chapters 1–6, including protocol layering, an 
edge/core distinction, the interconnection of multiple provider networks to form a 
global “network of networks,” and the clear separation of data and control planes with 
logically centralized control. We’ll now see these principles through the lens of mobile 
cellular networks (rather than through an Internet lens) and thus see these principles 
instantiated in different ways. And of course, with a carrier’s network having an all-
IP core, we’ll also encounter many of the Internet protocols that we now know well. 
We’ll cover additional 4G topics—mobility management in Section 7.6, and 4G secu-
rity in Section 8.8—later, after developing the basic principles needed for these topics.
Our discussion here of 4G and 5G networks will be relatively brief. Mobile 
cellular networking is an area with great breadth and depth, with many universi-
ties offering several courses on the topic. Readers seeking a deeper understanding 
are encouraged to see [Goodman 1997; Kaaranen 2001; Lin 2001; Korhonen 2003; 

594         CHAPTER 7    •    WIRELESS AND MOBILE NETWORKS
Schiller 2003; Palat 2009; Scourias 2012; Turner 2012; Akyildiz 2010], as well as 
the particularly excellent and exhaustive books [Mouly 1992; Sauter 2014].
Just as Internet RFCs define Internet-standard architecture and protocols, 4G 
and 5G networks are also defined by standards documents known as Technical Spec-
ifications. These documents are freely available online at [3GPP 2020]. Just like 
RFCs, technical specifications can make for rather dense and detailed reading. But 
when you have a question, they are the definitive source for answers!
7.4.1	4G LTE Cellular Networks: Architecture and Elements
The 4G networks that are pervasive as of this writing in 2020 implement the 4G 
Long-Term Evolution standard, or more succinctly 4G LTE. In this section, we’ll 
describe 4G LTE networks. Figure 7.17 shows the major elements of the 4G LTE 
network architecture. The network broadly divides into the radio network at the 
cellular network’s edge and the core network. All network elements communicate 
with each other using the IP protocol we studied in Chapter 4. As with earlier 2G 
and 3G networks, 4G LTE is full of rather obtuse acronyms and element names. 
We’ll try to cut through that jumble by first focusing on element functions and 
how the various elements of a 4G LTE network interact with each other in both 
the data and the control planes:
•	 Mobile Device. This is a smartphone, tablet, laptop, or IoT device that connects 
into a cellular carrier’s network. This is where applications such as web browsers, 
map apps, voice and videoconference apps, mobile payment apps, and so much 
more are run. The mobile device typically implements the full 5-layer Internet pro-
tocol stack, including the transport and application layers, as we saw with hosts at 
the Internet’s network edge. The mobile device is a network endpoint, with an IP 
address (obtained through NAT, as we’ll see). The mobile device also has a glob-
ally unique 64-bit identifier called the International Mobile ­Subscriber Iden-
tity (IMSI), which is stored on its SIM (Subscriber Identity Module) card. The 
IMSI identifies the subscriber in the worldwide cellular carrier network system, 
including the country and home cellular carrier network to which the subscriber 
belongs. In some ways, the IMSI is analogous to a MAC address. The SIM card 
also stores information about the services that the subscriber is able to access and 
encryption key information for that subscriber. In the official 4G LTE jargon, 
the mobile device is referred to as User Equipment (UE). However, in this text-
book, we’ll use the more reader-friendly term “mobile device” throughout. We 
also note here that a mobile device is not always mobile; for example, the device 
might be a fixed temperature sensor or a surveillance camera.
•	 Base Station. The base station sits at the “edge” of the carrier’s network and is 
responsible for managing the wireless radio resources and the mobile devices 
with its coverage area (shown as a hexagonal cell in Figure 7.17). As we’ll see, a 
mobile device will interact with a base station to attach to the carrier’s network. 
The base station coordinates device authentication and allocation of resources 

7.4    •    Cellular Networks: 4G and 5G         595
(channel access) in the radio access network. In this sense, cellular base station 
functions are comparable (but by no means identical) to those of APs in wireless 
LANs. But cellular base stations have several other important roles not found in 
wireless LANs. In particular, base stations create device-specific IP tunnels from 
the mobile device to gateways and interact among themselves to handle device 
mobility among cells. Nearby base stations also coordinate among themselves to 
manage the radio spectrum to minimize interference between cells. In the offi-
cial 4G LTE terminology, the base station is referred to as an “eNode-B,” which 
is rather opaque and non-descriptive. In this textbook, we will instead use the 
reader-friendlier term “base station” throughout.
	
	
As an aside, if you find LTE terminology a bit opaque, you aren’t alone! 
The etymology of “eNode-B” is rooted in earlier 3G terminology, where network 
function points were referred to as “nodes,” with “B” harkening back to earlier 
“Base Station (BS)” 1G terminology or “Base Transceiver Station (BTS)” in 2G 
terminology. 4G LTE is an “e”volution over 3G, and hence, an “e” now precedes 
“Node-B” in 4G LTE terminology. This name opaqueness shows no signs in 
stopping! In 5G systems, eNode-B functions are now referred to as “ng-eNB”; 
perhaps you can guess what that acronym stands for!
•	 Home Subscriber Server (HSS). As shown in Figure 7.18, the HSS is a 
­control-plane element. The HSS is a database, storing information about the 
mobile devices for which the HSS’s network is their home network. It is used in 
conjunction with the MME (discussed below) for device authentication.
•	 Serving Gateway (S-GW), Packet Data Network Gateway (P-GW), and 
other network routers. As shown in Figure 7.18, the Serving Gateway and the 
Packet Data Network Gateway are two routers (often collocated in practice) that 
Mobility
Management
Entity (MME)
Serving Gateway
(S-GW)
Home
Subscriber
Service (HSS)  
PDN gateway
(P-GW)
all-IP Enhanced Packet Core (EPC)
radio access
network
to
Internet 
Mobile device  
Base
station
Figure 7.17  ♦  Elements of the 4G LTE architecture

596         CHAPTER 7    •    WIRELESS AND MOBILE NETWORKS
lie on the data path between the mobile device and the Internet. The PDN 
Gateway also provides NAT IP addresses to mobile devices and performs NAT 
functions (see Section 4.3.4). The PDN Gateway is the last LTE element that a 
datagram originating at a mobile device encounters before entering the larger 
Internet. To the outside world, the P-GW looks like any other gateway router; 
the mobility of the mobile nodes within the cellular carrier’s LTE network is 
hidden from the outside world behind the P-GW. In addition to these gateway 
routers, a cellular carrier’s all-IP core will have additional routers whose role 
is similar to that of traditional IP routers—to forward IP datagrams among 
themselves along paths that will typically terminate at elements of the LTE 
core network.
•	 Mobility Management Entity (MME). The MME is also a control-plane element, 
as shown in Figure 7.18. Along with the HSS, it plays an important role in authen-
ticating a device wanting to connect into its network. It also sets up the tunnels on 
the data path from/to the device and the PDN Internet gateway router, and maintains 
information about an active mobile device’s cell location within the carrier’s cel-
lular network. But, as shown in Figure 7.18, it is not in the forwarding path for the 
mobile device’s datagrams being sent to and from the Internet.
	 Authentication. It is important for the network and the mobile device attaching 
to the network to mutually authenticate each other—for the network to know 
that the attaching device is indeed the device associated with a given IMSI, and 
for the mobile device to know that the network to which it is attaching is also a 
legitimate cellular carrier network. We will cover authentication in Chapter 8 
and cover 4G authentication in Section 8.8. Here, we simply note that the MME 
plays a middleman role between the mobile and Home Subscriber Service 
(HSS) in the mobile’s home network. Specifically, after receiving an attach 
request from mobile device, the local MME contacts the HSS in the mobile’s 
home network. The mobile’s home HSS then returns enough encrypted infor-
mation to the local MME to prove to the mobile device that the home HSS 
is performing authentication through this MME, and for the mobile device to 
prove to the MME that it is indeed the mobile associated with that IMSI. When 
a mobile device is attached to its home network, the HSS to be contacted dur-
ing authentication is located within that same home network. However, when a 
mobile device is roaming on a visited network operated by a different cellular 
network carrier, the MME in that roaming network will need to contact the HSS 
in the mobile device’s home network.
	 Path setup. As shown in the bottom half of Figure 7.18, the data path from the 
mobile device to the carrier’s gateway router consists of a wireless first hop 
between the mobile device and the base station, and concatenated IP tunnels 
between the base station and the Serving Gateway, and the Serving Gateway 
and the PDN Gateway. Tunnels are setup under the control of the MME and 
used for data forwarding (rather than direct forwarding among network routers) 
to facilitate device mobility—when a device moves, only the tunnel endpoint 

7.4    •    Cellular Networks: 4G and 5G         597
Control 
plane
User data
plane
MME
HSS
Base station
Base station
P-GW
S-GW
S-GW
P-GW
Figure 7.18  ♦  LTE data-plane and control-plane elements
terminating at the base station needs to be changed, while other tunnel end-
points, and the Quality of Service associated with a tunnel, remain unchanged.
	 Cell location tracking. As the device moves between cells, the base stations 
will update the MME on the device’s location. If the mobile device is in a 
sleep mode but nonetheless moving between cells, the base stations can no 
longer track the device’s location. In this case, it will be the responsibility of 
the MME to locate the device for wakeup, through a process known as paging.
Table 7.2 summarizes the key LTE architectural elements that we have dis-
cussed above and compares these functions with those we encountered in our study 
of WiFi wireless LANs (WLANs).
LTE Element
Description
Similar WLAN function(s)
Mobile device (UE: User equipment)
End user’s IP-capable wireless/mobile device  
(e.g., smartphone, tablet, laptop)
Host, end-system
Base Station (eNode-B)
Network side of wireless access link  
into LTE network
Access point (AP), although the LTE base station 
performs many functions not found in WLANs
The Mobility Management  
Entity (MME)
Coordinator for mobile device services: 
authentication, mobility management
Access point (AP), although the MME performs 
many functions not found in WLANs
Home Subscriber Server (HSS)
Located in a mobile device’s home network, 
providing authentication, access privileges in  
home and visited networks
No WLAN equivalent
Serving Gateway (S-GW),  
PDN-Gateway (P-GW)
Routers in a cellular carrier’s network, coordinating 
forwarding to outside of the carrier’s network
iBGP and eBGP routers in access ISP network
Radio Access Network
Wireless link between mobile device and a  
base station
802.11 wireless link between mobile and AP
Table 7.2  ♦  LTE Elements, and similar WLAN (WiFi) functions

598         CHAPTER 7    •    WIRELESS AND MOBILE NETWORKS
THE ARCHITECTURAL EVOLUTION FROM 2G TO 3G TO 4G
In a relatively short span of 20 years, cellular carrier networks have undergone an 
astonishing transition from being almost exclusively circuit-switched telephone net-
works to being all-IP packet-switched data networks which include voice as just one 
of many applications. How did this transition happen from an architectural stand-
point? Was there a “flag day,” when the previous telephony-oriented networks were 
turned “off” and the all-IP cellular network was turned “on”? Or did elements in the 
previous telephony-oriented networks begin taking on dual circuit (legacy) and packet 
(new) functionality, as we saw with the IPv4-to-IPv6 transition in Section 4.3.5?
Figure 7.19 is taken from the earlier 7th edition of this textbook, which covered 
both 2G and 3G cellular networks. (We have retired this historical material, which is 
still available on this book’s website, in favor of a deeper coverage of 4G LTE in this 
8th edition). Although the 2G network is a circuit-switched mobile telephone network, 
a comparison of Figures 7.17 and 7.19 illustrates a similar conceptual structure, 
albeit for voice rather than for data services—a wireless edge controlled by a base 
station, a gateway from the carrier’s network to the outside world, and aggregation 
points between the base stations and the gateway.
CASE HISTORY
Base station 
controller
Base station 
controller
Mobile
Switching
Center
Gateway Mobile
Switching
Center
Base Station
System (BSS)
Base Station System (BSS)
Public Telephone
Network
G
Figure 7.19  ♦  Elements of the 2G cellular architecture, supporting circuit-switched 
voice service with the carrier’s core network

7.4    •    Cellular Networks: 4G and 5G         599
Gateway Mobile
Switching Center
G
Radio Network
Controller (RNC)
Gateway GPRS
Support Node
Serving GPRS
Support Node
G
Mobile Switching
Center
Public Telephone
Network
Public
Internet
Figure 7.20  ♦  3G system architecture: supporting separate circuit-switched  
voice service and packet-switched data service with the carrier’s 
core network
Figure 7.20 (also taken from the 7th edition of this textbook) shows the main archi-
tectural components of the 3G cellular architecture, which supports both circuit-switched 
voice service and packet-switched data services. Here, the transition from a voice-only 
network to a combined voice and data network is clear: the existing core 2G cellular 
voice network elements remained untouched. However, additional cellular data func-
tionality was added in parallel to, and functioned independently from, the existing core 
voice network at that time. As shown in Figure 7.20, the splitting point into these two 
separate core voice and data networks happened at the network edge, at the base  
station in the radio access network. The alternative—integrating new data services 
directly into the core elements of the existing cellular voice network—would have raised 
the same challenges encountered in integrating new (IPv6) and legacy (IPv4) technolo-
gies in the Internet. The carriers also wanted to leverage and exploit their considerable 
investment of existing infrastructure (and profitable services!) in their existing cellular voice 
network.

600         CHAPTER 7    •    WIRELESS AND MOBILE NETWORKS
7.4.2	LTE Protocols Stacks
Since the 4G LTE architecture is an all-IP architecture, we’re already very famil-
iar  with the higher-layer protocols in the LTE protocol stack, in particular IP, 
TCP, UDP, and various application layer protocols, from our studies in Chapters 2  
through 5. Consequently, the new LTE protocols that we’ll focus on here are pri-
marily at the link and physical layers, and in mobility management.
Figure 7.21 shows the user-plane protocol stacks at the LTE mobile node, the 
base station, and the serving gateway. We’ll touch on several of LTE’s control-plane 
protocols later when we study LTE mobility management (Section 7.6) and security 
(Section 8.8). As we can see from Figure 7.21, most of the new and interesting user-
plane protocol activity is happening at the wireless radio link between the mobile 
device and the base station.
LTE divides the mobile device’s link layer into three sublayers:
•	 Packet Data Convergence. This uppermost sublayer of the link layer sits just 
below IP. The Packet Data Convergence Protocol (PDCP) [3GPP PDCP 2019] 
performs IP header/compression in order to decrease the number of bits sent over 
the wireless link, and encryption/decryption of the IP datagram using keys that 
were established via signaling messages between the LTE mobile device and the 
Mobility Management Entity (MME) when the mobile device first attached to the 
network; we’ll cover aspects of LTE security in Section 8.8.2.
•	 Radio Link Control. The Radio Link Control (RLC) Protocol [3GPP RLCP 
2018] performs two important functions: (i) fragmenting (on the sending side) 
and reassembly (on the receiving) of IP datagrams that are too large to fit into 
Base station
PDN Gateway 
(P-GW)
Serving Gateway 
(S-GW)
to/ from
Internet
IP
Packet Data
Convergence
Radio Link
Medium Access
Link
GTP-U
IP
Link
Physical
UDP
GTP-U
IP
Link
Physical
UDP
GTP-U
IP
Link
Physical
UDP
Application
Physical
Transport
IP
Packet Data
Convergence
Radio Link
Medium Access
Physical
Figure 7.21  ♦  LTE data-plane protocol stacks

7.4    •    Cellular Networks: 4G and 5G         601
the underlying link-layer frames, and (ii) link-layer reliable data transfer at the 
through the use of an ACK/NAK-based ARQ protocol. Recall the we’ve studied 
the basic elements of ARQ protocols in Section 3.4.1.
•	 Medium Access Control (MAC). The MAC layer performs transmission sched-
uling, that is, the requesting and use of the radio transmission slots described 
in Section 7.4.4. The MAC sublayer also performs additional error detection/­
correction functions, including the use of redundant bit transmission as a forward 
error-correction technique. The amount of redundancy can be adapted to channel 
conditions.
Figure 7.21 also shows the use of tunnels in the user data path. As discussed 
above, these tunnels are established, under MME control, when the mobile device 
first attaches to the network. Each tunnel between two endpoints has a unique tunnel 
endpoint identifier (TEID). When the base station receives datagrams from the mobile 
device, it encapsulates them using the GPRS Tunneling Protocol [3GPP GTPv1-U 
2019], including the TEID, and sends them in UDP segments to the Serving Gateway 
at the other end of the tunnel. On the receiving side, the base station decapsulates tun-
neled UDP datagrams, extracts the encapsulated IP datagram destined for the mobile 
device, and forwards that IP datagram over the wireless hop to the mobile device.
7.4.3	LTE Radio Access Network
LTE uses a combination of frequency division multiplexing and time division multi-
plexing on the downstream channel, known as orthogonal frequency division multi-
plexing (OFDM) [Hwang 2009]. (The term “orthogonal” comes from the fact the 
signals being sent on different frequency channels are created so that they interfere 
very little with each other, even when channel frequencies are tightly spaced). In 
LTE, each active mobile device is allocated one or more 0.5 ms time slots in one or 
more of the channel frequencies. Figure 7.22 shows an allocation of eight time slots 
over four frequencies. By being allocated increasingly more time slots (whether on 
the same frequency or on different frequencies), a mobile device is able to achieve 
increasingly higher transmission rates. Slot (re)allocation among mobile devices can 
be performed as often as once every millisecond. Different modulation schemes can 
also be used to change the transmission rate; see our earlier discussion of Figure 7.3 
and dynamic selection of modulation schemes in WiFi networks.
The particular allocation of time slots to mobile devices is not mandated by the 
LTE standard. Instead, the decision of which mobile devices will be allowed to trans-
mit in a given time slot on a given frequency is determined by the scheduling algo-
rithms provided by the LTE equipment vendor and/or the network operator. With 
opportunistic scheduling [Bender 2000; Kolding 2003; Kulkarni 2005], matching the 
physical-layer protocol to the channel conditions between the sender and receiver 
and choosing the receivers to which packets will be sent based on channel conditions 
allow the base station to make best use of the wireless medium. In addition, user 

602         CHAPTER 7    •    WIRELESS AND MOBILE NETWORKS
priorities and contracted levels of service (e.g., silver, gold, or platinum) can be used 
in scheduling downstream packet transmissions. In addition to the LTE capabilities 
described above, LTE-Advanced allows for downstream bandwidths of hundreds of 
Mbps by allocating aggregated channels to a mobile device [Akyildiz 2010].
7.4.4	Additional LTE Functions: Network Attachment and 
Power Management
Let’s conclude or study of 4G LTE here by considering two additional important 
LTE functions: (i) the process with which a mobile device first attaches to the net-
work and (ii) the techniques used by the mobile device, in conjunction with core 
network elements, to manage its power use.
Network Attachment
The process by which a mobile device attaches to the cellular carrier’s network 
divides broadly into three phases:
•	 Attachment to a Base Station. This first phase of device attachment is similar in 
purpose to, but quite different in practice from, the 802.11 association protocol 
that we studied in Section 7.31. A mobile device wishing to attach to a cellular 
carrier network will begin a bootstrap process to learn about, and then associate 
with, a nearby base station. The mobile device initially searches all channels in all 
frequency bands for a primary synchronization signal that is periodically broadcast 
Figure 7.22  ♦  Twenty 0.5-ms slots organized into 10 ms frames at each 
frequency. An eight-slot allocation is shown shaded.
f1
f2
f3
f4
f5
f6
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
9.0
9.5
10.0

7.4    •    Cellular Networks: 4G and 5G         603
every 5 ms by a base station. Once this signal is found, the mobile device remains on 
this frequency and locates the secondary synchronization signal. With information 
found in this second signal, the device can locate (following several further steps) 
additional information such as channel bandwidth, channel configurations, and the 
cellular carrier information of that base station. Armed with this information, the 
mobile device can select a base station to associate with (preferentially attaching to 
its home network, if available) and establish a control-plane signaling connection 
across the wireless hop with that base station. This mobile-to-base-station channel 
will be used through the remainder of the network attachment process.
•	 Mutual Authentication. In our earlier description of the Mobility Management 
Entity (MME) in Section 7.4.1, we noted that the base station contacts the local 
MME to perform mutual authentication—a process that we’ll study in further 
detail in Section 8.8.2. This is the second phase of network attachment, allowing 
the network to know that the attaching device is indeed the device associated 
with a given IMSI, and the mobile device to know that the network to which it 
is attaching is also a legitimate cellular carrier network. Once this second phase 
of network attachment is complete, the MME and mobile device have mutually 
authenticated each other, and the MME also knows the identity of the base station 
to which the mobile is attached. Armed with this information, the MME is now 
ready to configure the Mobile-device-to-PDN-gateway data path.
•	 Mobile-device-to-PDN-gateway Data Path Configuration. The MME contacts 
the PDN gateway (which also provides a NAT address for the mobile device), 
the Serving gateway, and the base station to establish the two tunnels shown in 
Figure 7.21. Once this phase is complete, the mobile device is able to send/receive 
IP datagrams via the base station through these tunnels to and from the Internet!
Power Management: Sleep Modes
Recall in our earlier discussion of advanced features in 802.11 (Section 7.3.5) and 
Bluetooth (Section 7.3.6) that a radio in a wireless device may enter a sleep state to 
save power when it is not transmitting or receiving in order to minimize the amount 
of time that the mobile device’s circuitry needs to be “on” for sending/receiving data, 
and for channel sensing. In 4G LTE, a sleeping mobile device can be in one of two 
different sleep states. In the discontinuous reception state, which is typically entered 
after several hundred milliseconds of inactivity [Sauter 2014], the mobile device and 
the base station will schedule periodic times in advance (typically several hundred 
milliseconds apart) at which the mobile device will wake up and actively monitor the 
channel for downstream (base station to mobile device) transmissions; apart from 
these scheduled times, however, the mobile device’s radio will be sleeping.
If the discontinuous reception state might be considered a “light sleep,” the second 
sleep state—the Idle state—which follows even longer periods of 5 to 10 seconds of 
inactivity, might be thought of as a “deep sleep.” While in this deep sleep, the mobile 
device’s radio wakes up and monitors the channel even less frequently. Indeed, this 
sleep is so deep that if the mobile device moves into a new cell in the carrier’s network 

604         CHAPTER 7    •    WIRELESS AND MOBILE NETWORKS
while sleeping, it need not inform the base station with which it was previous associ-
ated. Thus, when waking up periodically from this deep sleep, the mobile device will 
need to re-establish an association with a (potentially new) base station in order to 
check for paging messages broadcast by the MME to base stations nearby the base 
station with which the mobile was last associated. These control-plane paging mes-
sages, which are broadcast by these base stations to all mobile devices in their cells, 
indicate which mobile devices should fully wake up and re-establish a new data-plane 
connection to a base station (see Figure 7.18) in order to receive incoming packets.
7.4.5	The Global Cellular Network: A Network of Networks
Having now studied the 4G cellular network architecture, let’s take a step back at 
take a look at how the global cellular network—itself a “network of networks” like 
the Internet—is organized.
Figure 7.23 shows a user’s mobile smartphone connected via a 4G base station 
into its home network. The user’s home mobile network is operated by a cellular 
Home cellular
carrier network
Gateway
Home Subscriber
Server
Visited mobile
carrier network 
Gateway
Public Internet
and IPX
Figure 7.23  ♦  The global cellular data network: a network of networks.

7.4    •    Cellular Networks: 4G and 5G         605
carrier such as Verizon, AT&T, T-Mobile, or Sprint in the United States; Orange in 
France; or SK Telecom in Korea. The user’s home network, in turn, is connected 
to the networks of other cellular carriers and to the global Internet, though one or 
more gateway routers in the home network, as shown in Figure 7.23. The mobile 
networks themselves interconnect with each other either via the public Internet or via 
an Internet Protocol Packet eXchange (IPX) Network [GSMA 2018a]. An IPX is a 
managed network specifically for interconnecting cellular carriers, similar to Internet 
eXchange Points (see Figure 1.15) for peering among ISPs. From Figure 7.23, we 
can see that the global cellular network is indeed a “network of networks”—just like 
the Internet (recall Figure 1.15 and Section 5.4). 4G networks can also peer with 3G 
cellular voice/data networks and earlier voice-only networks.
We’ll return shortly to additional 4G LTE topics—mobility management in 
Section 7.6, and 4G security in Section 8.8.2—later, after developing the basic 
principles needed for these topics. Let’s now take a quick look at the emerging 
5G networks.
7.4.6	5G Cellular Networks
The ultimate wide-area data service would be one with ubiquitous gigabit connec-
tion speeds, extremely low latency, and unrestricted limitations on the number of 
users and devices that could be supported in any region. Such a service would open 
the door to all kinds of new applications, including pervasive augmented reality and 
virtual reality, control of autonomous vehicles via wireless connections, control of 
robots in factories via wireless connections, and replacement of residential access 
technologies, such as DSL and cable, with fixed wireless Internet services (that is, 
residential wireless connections from base stations to modems in homes).
It is expected that 5G, for which progressively improved versions are likely to 
be rolled out in the 2020 decade, will make a big step towards achieving the goals 
of the ultimate wide-area data service. It is predicted that 5G will provide roughly a 
10x increase in peak bitrate, a 10x decrease in latency, and a 100x increase in traffic 
capacity over 4G [Qualcomm 2019].
Principally, 5G refers to “5G NR (New Radio),” which is the standard adopted 
by 3GPP. Other 5G technologies besides NR do exist, however. For example, Veri-
zon’s proprietary 5G TF network operates on 28 and 39 GHz frequencies and is used 
only for fixed wireless Internet service, not in smartphones.
5G standards divide frequencies into two groups: FR1 (450 MHz–6 GHz) and 
FR2 (24 GHz–52 GHz). Most early deployments will be in the FR1 space, although 
there are early deployments as of 2020 in the FR2 space for fixed Internet residential 
access as mentioned just above. Importantly, the physical layer (that is, wireless) 
aspects of 5G are not backward-compatible with 4G mobile communications systems 
such as LTE: in particular, it can’t be delivered to existing smartphones by deploying 
base station upgrades or software updates. Therefore, in the transition to 5G, wireless 
carriers will need to make substantial investments in physical infrastructure.

606         CHAPTER 7    •    WIRELESS AND MOBILE NETWORKS
FR2 frequencies are also known as millimeter wave frequencies. While 
millimeter wave frequencies allow for much faster data speeds, they come with 
two major drawbacks:
•	 Millimeter wave frequencies have much shorter range from base station to receiv-
ers. This makes millimeter wave technology unsuitable in rural areas and requires 
denser deployments of base stations in urban areas.
•	 Millimeter wave communication is highly susceptible to atmospheric interfer-
ence. Nearby foliage and rain can cause problems for outdoor use.
5G is not one cohesive standard, but instead consists of three co-existing standards 
[Dahlman 2018]:
•	 eMBB (Enhanced Mobile Broadband). Initial deployments of 5G NR have 
focused on eMBB, which provides for increased bandwidth for higher down-
load and upload speeds, as well as a moderate reduction in latency when 
compared to 4G LTE. eMBB enables rich media applications, such as mobile 
augmented reality and virtual reality, as well as mobile 4K resolution and 360° 
video streaming.
•	 URLLC (Ultra Reliable Low-Latency Communications). URLLC is targeted 
towards applications that are highly latency-sensitive, such as factory automation 
and autonomous driving. URLLC is targeting latencies of 1msec. As of this writ-
ing, technologies that enable URLLC are still being standardized.
•	 mMTC (Massive Machine Type Communications). mMTC is a narrowband 
access type for sensing, metering, and monitoring applications. One priority for 
the design of 5G networks is to lower barriers for network connectivity for IoT 
devices. In addition to lowering latency, emerging technologies for 5G networks 
are focusing on reducing power requirements, making the use of IoT devices 
more pervasive than has been with 4G LTE.
5G and Millimeter Wave Frequencies
Many 5G innovations will be a direct result of working in the millimeter wave fre-
quencies in the 24 GHz–52 GHz band. For example, these frequencies offer the 
potential of achieving 100x increase in capacity over 4G. To get some insight into 
this, capacity can be defined as the product of three terms [Björnson 2017]:
capacity = cell density * available spectrum * spectral efficiency
where cell density is in units of cells/km2, available spectrum is in units of Hertz, 
and spectral efficiency is a measure of how efficiently each base station can com-
municate with users and is in units of bps/Hz/cell. By multiplying these units out, it 
is easy to see that capacity is in units of bps/km2. For each of these three terms, the 
values will be larger for 5G than for 4G:

7.4    •    Cellular Networks: 4G and 5G         607
•	 Because millimeter frequencies have much shorter range than 4G LTE fre-
quencies, more base stations are required, which in turn increases the cell 
density.
•	 Because 5G FR2 operates in a much larger frequency band (52 − 24 = 28 GHz) 
than 4G LTE (up to about 2 GHz), it has more available spectrum.
•	 With regard to spectral efficiency, information theory says that if you want to 
double spectral efficiency, a 17-fold increase in power is needed [Björnson 
2017]. Instead of increasing power, 5G uses MIMO-technology (the same tech-
nology we encountered in our study of 802.11 networks in Section 7.3), which 
uses multiple antennas at each base station. Rather than broadcasting signals in 
all directions, each MIMO antenna employs beam forming and directs the signal 
at the user. MIMO technology allows a base station to send to 10–20 users at the 
same time in the same frequency band.
By increasing all three terms in the capacity equation, 5G is expected to provide 
a 100x increase in capacity in urban areas. Similarly, owing to the much wider fre-
quency band, 5G is expected to provide peak download rates of 1 Gbps or higher.
Millimeter wave signals are, however, easily blocked by buildings and trees. 
Small cell stations are needed to fill in coverage gaps between base stations and 
users. In a highly populous region, the distance between two small cells could vary 
from 10 to 100 meters [Dahlman 2018].
5G Core Network
The 5G Core network is the data network that manages all of the 5G mobile voice, 
data and Internet connections. The 5G Core network is being redesigned to better 
integrate with the Internet and cloud-based services, and also includes distributed 
servers and caches across the network, thereby reducing latency. Network function 
virtualization (as discussed in Chapters 4 and 5), and network slicing for different 
applications and services, will be managed in the core.
The new 5G Core specification introduces major changes in the way mobile 
networks support a wide variety of services with varied performance. As in the case 
of the 4G core network (recall Figures 7.17 and 7.18), the 5G core relays data traffic 
from end devices, authenticates devices, and manages device mobility. The 5G core 
also contains all of the network elements that we encountered in Section 7.4.2—the 
mobile devices, the cells, the base stations, and the Mobility Management Entity 
(now divided into two sub-elements, as discussed below), the HSS, and the Serving 
and PDN gateways.
Although the 4G and 5G core networks perform similar functions, there are some 
major differences in that the new 5G core architecture. The 5G Core is designed for 
complete control and user-plane separation (see Chapter 5). The 5G Core consists 
purely of virtualized software-based network functions. This new architecture will give 

608         CHAPTER 7    •    WIRELESS AND MOBILE NETWORKS
operators the flexibility to meet the diverse requirements of the different 5G applica-
tions. Some of the new 5G core network functions include [Rommer 2019]:
•	 User-Plane Function (UPF). Control and user-plane separation (see Chapter 5) 
allows packet processing to be distributed and pushed to the network edge.
•	 Access and Mobility Management Function (AMF). The 5G Core essentially 
decomposes the 4G Mobility Management Entity (MME) into two functional 
elements: AMF and SMF. The AMF receives all the connection and session 
information from end-user equipment but only handles connection and mobility 
management tasks.
•	 Session Management Function (SMF). Session management is handled by the 
Session Management Function (SMF). The SMF is responsible for interacting 
with the decoupled data plane. The SMF also performs IP address management 
and plays the role of DHCP.
As of this writing (2020), 5G is in its early stages of deployment, and many 5G 
standards have yet to be finalized. Only time will tell whether 5G will become a per-
vasive broadband wireless service, whether it will successfully compete with WiFi 
for indoor wireless service, whether it will become a critical component of factory 
automation and the autonomous vehicle infrastructure, and whether it will take us a 
big step forward toward the ultimate wide-area wireless service.
7.5	 Mobility Management: Principles
Having covered the wireless nature of the communication links in a wireless net-
work, it’s now time to turn our attention to the mobility that these wireless links ena-
ble. In the broadest sense, a mobile device is one that changes its point of attachment 
into the network over time. Because the term mobility has taken on many meanings 
in both the computer and telephony worlds, it will serve us well first to carefully 
consider forms of mobility.
7.5.1	Device Mobility: a Network-layer Perspective
From the network layer’s standpoint, a physically mobile device will present a very 
different set of challenges to the network layer, depending on how active the device is 
as it moves between points of attachment to the network. At the one end of the spec-
trum, scenario (a) in Figure 7.24 is the mobile user who himself/herself physically 
moves between networks, but powers down the mobile device when moving. For 
example, a student might disconnect from a wireless classroom network and power 
down his/her device, head to the dining commons and connect to the wireless access 

7.5    •    Mobility Management: Principles         609
network there while eating, and then disconnect and power down from the dining 
commons network, walk to the library, and connect to the library’s wireless network 
while studying. From a networking perspective, this device is not mobile—it attaches 
to an access network and remains in that access network while on. In this case, the 
device serially associates with, and later disassociates from, each wireless access 
network encountered. This case of device (non-)mobility can be completely handled 
using the networking mechanisms we’ve already studied in Sections 7.3 and 7.4.
In scenario (b) in Figure 7.24, the device is physically mobile but remains 
attached to the same access network. This device is also not mobile from a network-
layer perspective. Additionally, if the device remains associated with the same 802.11 
AP or LTE base station, the device is not even mobile from a link-layer perspective.
From a network standpoint, our interest in device mobility really starts with case (c), 
where a device changes its access network (e.g., 802.11 WLAN or LTE cell) while 
continuing to send and receiving IP datagrams, and while maintaining higher-level 
(e.g., TCP) connections. Here, the network will need to provide handover—a trans-
fer of responsibility for forwarding datagrams to/from one AP or base station to the 
mobile device—as the device moves among WLANs or among LTE cells. We’ll 
cover handover in detail in Section 7.6. If the handover occurs within access net-
works belonging to a single network provider, that provider can orchestrate handover 
on its own. When a mobile device roams between multiple provider networks, as in 
scenario (d), the providers must orchestrate handover together, which considerably 
complicates the handover process.
7.5.2	Home Networks and Roaming on Visited Networks
As we learned in our discussions of cellular 4G LTE networks in Section 7.4.1, every 
subscriber has a “home” with some cellular provider. We learned that the Home 
Subscriber Service (HSS) stores information about each of its subscribers, includ-
ing a globally unique device ID (embedded in a subscriber’s SIM card), information 
about services that the subscriber may access, cryptographic keys to be used for 
(a) Device mobility
 
between access
 
networks, but
 
powered down
 
while moving
 
between access
 
networks
(b) Device mobility
 
only within same
 
wireless access
 
network, in single
 
provider network
(c) Device mobility
 
among access
 
networks in single
 
provider network,
 
while maintaining
 
ongoing connections
(d) Device mobility
 
among multiple
 
provider networks,
 
while maintaining
 
ongoing connections
Figure 7.24  ♦  Various degrees of mobility, from a network-layer  
perspective

610         CHAPTER 7    •    WIRELESS AND MOBILE NETWORKS
communication, and billing/charging information. When a device is connected to a 
cellular network, other than its home network, that device is said to be roaming on a 
visited network. When a mobile device attaches to, and roams on, a visited network, 
coordination will be required between the home network and the visited network.
The Internet does not have a similarly strong notion of a home network or a vis-
ited network. In practice, a student’s home network might be the network operated 
by his/her school; for mobile professionals, their home network might be their com-
pany network. The visited network might be the network of a school or a company 
they are visiting. But there is no notion of a home/visited network deeply embedded 
in the Internet’s architecture. The Mobile IP protocol [Perkins 1998, RFC 5944], 
which we will cover briefly in Section 7.6, was a proposal that strongly incorporated 
the notion of home/visited networks. But Mobile IP has seen limited deployment/use 
in practice. There are also activities underway that are built on top of the existing IP 
infrastructure to provide authenticated network access across visited IP networks. 
Eduroam [Eduroam 2020] is one such activity.
The notion of a mobile device having a home network provides two important 
advantages: the home network provides a single location where information about 
that device can be found, and (as we will see) it can serve as a coordination point for 
communication to/from a roaming mobile device.
To appreciate the potential value of the central point of information and coordi-
nation, consider the human analogy of a 20-something adult Bob moving out of the 
family home. Bob becomes mobile, living in a series of dormitories and apartments, 
and often changing addresses. If an old friend Alice wants to get in touch, how can 
Alice find the current address of Bob? One common way is to contact the family, 
since a mobile 20-something adult will often register his or her current address with 
the family (if for no other reason than so that the parents can send money to help pay 
the rent!). The family home becomes that unique location that others can go to as a 
first step in communicating with Bob. Additionally, later postal communication from 
Alice may be either indirect (e.g., with mail being sent first to Bob’s family home and 
then forwarded to Bob) or direct (e.g., with Alice using the address obtained from 
Bob’s parents to send mail directly to Bob).
7.5.3	Direct and Indirect Routing to/from a Mobile Device
Let us now consider the conundrum faced by the Internet-connected host (that we 
will refer to as a correspondent) in Figure 7.25 wishing to communicate with a 
mobile device that might be located within that mobile device’s cellular home net-
work, or might be roaming in a visited network. In our development below, we’ll 
adopt a 4G/5G cellular network perspective, since these networks have such a long 
history of supporting device mobility. But as we’ll see, the fundamental challenges 
and basic solution approaches for supporting device mobility are equally applicable 
in both cellular networks and in the Internet.
As shown in Figure 7.25, we’ll assume that the mobile device has a globally 
unique identifier associated with it. In 4G, LTE cellular networks (see Section 7.4), 

7.5    •    Mobility Management: Principles         611
this would be the International Mobile Subscriber Identity (IMSI) and an associated 
phone number, stored on a mobile device’s SIM card. For mobile Internet users, this 
would be a permanent IP address in the IP address range of its home network, as in 
the case of the Mobile IP architecture.
What approaches might be used in a mobile network architecture that would 
allow a datagram sent by the correspondent to reach that mobile device? Three basic 
approaches can be identified and are discussed below. As we will see, the latter two 
of these are adopted in practice.
Leveraging the Existing IP Address Infrastructure
Perhaps the simplest approach to routing to a mobile device in a visited network is 
to simply use the existing IP addressing infrastructure—to add nothing new to the 
architecture. What could be easier!
Recall from our discussion of Figure 4.21 that an ISP uses BGP to advertise 
routes to destination networks by enumerating the CIDRized address ranges of reach-
able networks. A visited network could thus advertise to all other networks that a 
Home network
gateway
Visited Network
79.129/16
Home Network
128.119/16
Visited network
gateway
Mobility
manager
Home
Subscriber
Service
Correspondent
Public or private
Internet
Mobility
manager
NAT IP:
10.0.0.99
IMSI
78:4f:43:98:d9:27
Permanent IP:
128.119.40.186
IMSI
78:4f:43:98:d9:27
Figure 7.25  ♦  Elements of a mobile network architecture

612         CHAPTER 7    •    WIRELESS AND MOBILE NETWORKS
particular mobile device is resident in its network simply by advertising a highly 
specific address—the mobile device’s full 32-bit IP permanent address—essentially 
informing other networks that it has the path to be used to forward datagrams to that 
mobile device. These neighboring networks would then propagate this routing infor-
mation throughout the network as part of the normal BGP procedure of updating rout-
ing information and forwarding tables. Since datagrams will always be forwarded to 
the router advertising the most specific destination for that address (see Section 4.3), 
all datagrams addressed to that mobile device will be forwarded to the visited net-
work. If the mobile device leaves one visited network and joins another, the new vis-
ited network can advertise a new, highly specific route to the mobile device, and the 
old visited network can withdraw its routing information regarding the mobile device. 
This solves two problems at once, and does so without making changes to the 
network-layer infrastructure! Other networks know the location of the mobile device, 
and it is easy to route datagrams to the mobile device, since the forwarding tables 
will direct datagrams to the visited network. The killer drawback, however, is that 
of scalability—network routers would have to maintain forwarding table entries for 
potentially billions of mobile devices, and update a device’s entry each time it roams 
to a different network. Clearly, this approach would not work in practice. Some addi-
tional drawbacks are explored in the problems at the end of this chapter.
An alternative, more practical, approach (and one that has been adopted in prac-
tice) is to push mobility functionality from the network core to the network edge—
a recurring theme in our study of Internet architecture. A natural way to do this 
is via the mobile device’s home network. In much the same way that parents of 
the mobile 20-something adult track their child’s location, a mobility management 
entity (MME) in the mobile device’s home network could track the visited network 
in which the mobile device resides. This information might reside in a database, 
shown as the HSS database in Figure 7.25. A protocol operating between the visited 
network and the home network will be needed to update the network in which the 
mobile device resides. You might recall that we encountered the MME and HSS 
elements in our study of 4G LTE. We’ll reuse their element names here, since they 
are so descriptive, and also because they are pervasively deployed in 4G networks.
Let’s next consider the visited network elements shown in Figure 7.25 in more 
detail. The mobile device will clearly need an IP address in the visited network. 
The possibilities here include using a permanent address associated with the mobile 
device’s home network, allocating a new address in the address range of the visited 
network, or providing an IP address via NAT (see Section 4.3.4). In the latter two 
cases, a mobile device has a transient identifier (a newly allocated IP address) in 
addition to its permanent identifiers stored in the HSS in its home network. These 
cases are analogous to a writer addressing a letter to the address of the house in which 
our mobile 20-something adult is currently living. In the case of a NAT address, 
datagrams destined to the mobile device would eventually reach the NAT gateway 
router in the visited network, which would then perform NAT address translation and 
forward the datagram to the mobile device.

7.5    •    Mobility Management: Principles         613
We have now seen a number of elements of a solution to the correspondent’s 
dilemma in Figure 7.24: home and visited networks, the MME and HSS, and mobile 
device addressing. But how should datagrams be addressed and forwarded to the 
mobile device? Since only the HSS (and not network-wide routers) knows the loca-
tion of the mobile device, the correspondent cannot simply address a datagram to the 
mobile device’s permanent address and send it into the network. Something more 
must be done. Two approaches can be identified: indirect and direct routing.
Indirect Routing to a Mobile Device
Let’s again consider the correspondent that wants to send a datagram to a mobile 
device. In the indirect routing approach, the correspondent simply addresses the 
datagram to the mobile device’s permanent address and sends the datagram into 
the network, blissfully unaware of whether the mobile device is resident in its home 
network or in a visited network; mobility is thus completely transparent to the cor-
respondent. Such datagrams are first routed, as usual, to the mobile device’s home 
network. This is illustrated in step 1 in Figure 7.26.
Home
network
gateway
Visited Network
79.129/16
Home Network
128.119/16
Visited network
gateway
Mobility
manager
Home
Subscriber
Service
Correspondent
Mobility
manager
NAT IP:
10.0.0.99
IMSI
78:4f:43:98:d9:27
Permanent IP:
128.119.40.186
IMSI
78:4f:43:98:d9:27
3
4b
1
2
4a
Figure 7.26  ♦  Indirect routing to a mobile device

614         CHAPTER 7    •    WIRELESS AND MOBILE NETWORKS
Let’s now turn our attention to the HSS, which is responsible for interacting with 
visited networks to track the mobile device’s location, and the home network’s gate-
way router. One job of this gateway router is to be on the lookout for an arriving data-
gram addressed to a device whose home is in that network, but that currently resides 
in a visited network. The home network gateway intercepts this datagram, consults 
with the HSS to determine the visited network where the mobile device is resident, 
and forwards the datagram toward the visited network gateway router—step 2 in Fig-
ure 7.26. The visited network gateway router then forwards the datagram toward the 
mobile device—step 3 in Figure 7.26. If NAT translation is used, as in Figure 7.26, 
the visited network gateway router performs NAT translation.
It is instructive to consider the rerouting at the home network in bit more detail. 
Clearly, the home network gateway will need to forward the arriving datagram to 
the gateway router in the visited network. On the other hand, it is desirable to leave 
the correspondent’s datagram intact, since the application receiving the datagram 
should be unaware that the datagram was forwarded via the home network. Both 
goals can be satisfied by having the home gateway encapsulate the correspondent’s 
original complete datagram within a new (larger) datagram. This larger datagram 
is then addressed and delivered to the visited network’s gateway router, which will 
decapsulate the datagram—that is, remove the correspondent’s original datagram 
from within the larger encapsulating datagram—and forward (step 3 in Figure 7.26) 
the original datagram to the mobile device. The sharp reader will note that the encap-
sulation/decapsulation described here is precisely the notion of tunneling, discussed 
in Section 4.3 in the context of IPv6; indeed, we also discussed the use of tunneling 
in the context of Figure 7.18, when we introduced the 4G LTE data plane.
Finally, let’s consider how the mobile device sends datagrams to the corre-
spondent. In the context of Figure 7.26, the mobile device will clearly need to for-
ward the datagram through the visited gateway router, in order to perform NAT 
translation. But how then should the visited gateway router forward the datagram 
to the correspondent? As shown in Figure 7.26, there are two options here: (4a) the 
datagram could be tunneled back to the home gateway router, and sent to the corre-
spondent from there, or (4b) the datagram could be transmitted from the visited net-
work directly to the correspondent—an approach known as local breakout [GSMA 
2019a] in LTE. 
Let’s summarize our discussion of indirect routing by reviewing the new net-
work-layer functionality required to support mobility.
•	 A mobile-device–to–visited-network association protocol. The mobile device will 
need to associate with the visited network, and will similarly need to disassociate 
when leaving the visited network.
•	 A visited-network–to–home-network-HSS registration protocol. The visited net-
work will need to register the mobile device’s location with the HSS in the home 
network, and perhaps use information obtained from the HSS in performing 
device authentication.

7.5    •    Mobility Management: Principles         615
•	 A datagram tunneling protocol between in the home network gateway and the 
visited network gateway router. The sending side performs encapsulation and 
forwarding of the correspondent’s original datagram; on the receiving side, the 
gateway router performs decapsulation, NAT translation, and forwarding of the 
original datagram to the mobile device.
The previous discussion provides all the needed elements for a mobile device to 
maintain an ongoing connection with a correspondent as the device moves among 
networks. When a device roams from one visited network to another, the new visited 
network information needs to be updated in the home network HSS, and the home-
gateway-router-to-visited-gateway-router tunnel endpoint needs to be moved. But will 
the mobile device see an interrupted flow of datagrams as it moves between networks? 
As long as the time between the mobile device disconnection from one visited network 
and its attachment to the next visited network is small, few datagrams will be lost. 
Recall from Chapter 3 that end-to-end connections can experience datagram loss due 
to network congestion. Hence, occasional datagram loss within a connection when a 
device moves between networks is by no means a catastrophic problem. If loss-free 
communication is required, upper-layer mechanisms will recover from datagram loss, 
whether such loss results from network congestion or from device mobility.
Our discussion above has been purposefully somewhat generic. An indirect 
routing approach is used in the mobile IP standard [RFC 5944], as well as in 4G 
LTE networks [Sauter 2014]. Their details, in particular the tunneling procedures 
employed, differ just a bit from our generic discussion above.
Direct Routing to a Mobile Device
The indirect routing approach illustrated in Figure 7.26 suffers from an inefficiency 
known as the triangle routing problem—datagrams addressed to the mobile device 
must be forwarded first to the home network and then to the visited network, even 
when a much more efficient route exists between the correspondent and the roaming 
mobile device. In the worst case, imagine a mobile user who is roaming on the same 
network that is the home network for an overseas colleague who our mobile user is 
visiting. The two are sitting side-by-side and exchanging data. Datagrams between 
the mobile user and his overseas colleague will be forwarded to the mobile user’s 
home network and then back again to the visited network!
Direct routing overcomes the inefficiency of triangle routing, but does so at the 
cost of additional complexity. In the direct routing approach, shown in Figure 7.27, 
the correspondent first discovers the visited network in which the mobile is resident. 
This is done by querying the HSS in the mobile device’s home network, assuming 
(as in the case of indirect routing) that the mobile device’s visited network is regis-
tered in the HSS. This is shown as steps 1 and 2 in Figure 7.27. The correspondent 
then tunnels datagrams from its network directly to the gateway router in the mobile 
device’s visited network.

616         CHAPTER 7    •    WIRELESS AND MOBILE NETWORKS
While direct routing overcomes the triangle routing problem, it introduces two 
important additional challenges:
•	 A mobile-user location protocol is needed for the correspondent to query the HSS 
to obtain the mobile device’s visited network (steps 1 and 2 in Figure 7.27). This 
is in addition to the protocol needed for the mobile device to register its location 
with its HSS.
•	 When the mobile device moves from one visited network to another, how will the 
correspondent know to now forward datagrams to the new visited network? In the 
case of indirect routing, this problem was easily solved by updating the HSS in 
the home network, and changing the tunnel endpoint to terminate at the gateway 
router of the new visited network. However, with direct routing, this change in vis-
ited networks is not so easily handled, as the HSS is queried by the correspondent 
only at the beginning of the session. Thus, additional protocol mechanisms would 
be required to proactively update the correspondent each time the mobile device 
moves. Two problems at the end of this chapter explore solutions to this problem.
Home
network
gateway
Visited Network
79.129/16
Home Network
128.119/16
Visited network
gateway
Home
Subscriber
Service
Correspondent
Mobility
manager
NAT IP:
10.0.0.99
IMSI
78:4f:43:98:d9:27
Permanent IP:
128.119.40.186
IMSI
78:4f:43:98:d9:27
3
2
Mobility
manager
4
1
Figure 7.27  ♦  Direct routing to a mobile device

7.6    •    Mobility Management in Practice         617
7.6	 Mobility Management in Practice
In the previous section, we identified key fundamental challenges and potential solu-
tions in developing a network architecture to support device mobility: the notions of 
home and visited networks; the home network’s role as a central point of informa-
tion and control for mobile devices subscribed to that home network; control-plane 
functions needed by a home network’s mobility management entity to track a mobile 
device roaming among visited networks; and data-plane approaches of direct and 
indirect routing to enable a correspondent and a mobile device to exchange data-
grams. Let’s now look at how these principles are put into practice! In Section 7.2.1, 
we’ll study mobility management in 4G/5G networks; in Section 7.2.1, we’ll look at 
Mobile IP, which has been proposed for the Internet.
7.6.1	Mobility Management in 4G/5G Networks
Our earlier study of 4G and emerging 5G architectures in Section 7.4 acquainted 
us with all of the network elements that play a central role in 4G/5G mobility 
management. Let’s now illustrate how those elements interoperate with each other 
to provide mobility services in today’s 4G/5G networks [Sauter 2014; GSMA 
2019b], which have their roots in earlier 3G cellular voice and data networks 
[Sauter 2014], and even earlier 2G voice-only networks [Mouly 1992]. This will 
help us synthesize what we’ve learned so far, allow us to introduce a few more 
advanced topics as well, and provide a lens into what might be in store for 5G 
mobility management.
Let’s consider a simple scenario in which a mobile user (e.g., a passenger in a 
car), with a smartphone attaches to a visited 4G/5G network, begins streaming a HD 
video from a remote server, and then moves from the cell coverage of one 4G/5G 
base station to another. The four major steps in this scenario are shown in Figure 7.28:
	1.	 Mobile device and base station association. The mobile device associates with 
a base station in the visited network.
	2.	 Control-plane configuration of network elements for the mobile device. The 
visited and home networks establish control-plane state indicating that the 
mobile device is resident in the visited network.
	3.	 Data-plane configuration of forwarding tunnels for the mobile device. The vis-
ited network and the home network establish tunnels through which the mobile 
device and streaming server can send/receive IP datagrams, using indirect rout-
ing through the home network’s Packet Data Network gateway (P-GW).
	4.	 Mobile device handover from one base station to another. The mobile device 
changes its point of attachment to the visited network, via handover from one 
base station to another.
Let’s now consider each of these four steps in more detail.

618         CHAPTER 7    •    WIRELESS AND MOBILE NETWORKS
1.	Base station association. Recall that in Section 7.4.2, we studied the procedures 
by which a mobile device associates with a base station. We learned that the mobile 
device listens on all frequencies for primary signals being transmitted by base sta-
tions in its area. The mobile device acquires progressively more information about 
these base stations, ultimately selecting the base station with which to associate, 
and bootstrapping a control-­signaling channel with that base station. As part of this 
association, the mobile device provides the base station with its International Mobile 
Subscriber Identity (IMSI), which uniquely identifies the mobile device as well as its 
home network and other additional subscriber information.
2.	Control-plane configuration of LTE network elements for the mobile device.
Once the mobile-device-to-base-station signaling channel has been established, the 
base station can contact the MME in the visited network. The MME will consult and 
configure a number of 4G/5G elements in both the home and visited networks to 
establish state on behalf of the mobile node:
•	 The MME will use to the IMSI and other information provided by the mobile 
device to retrieve authentication, encryption, and available network service infor-
mation for that subscriber. That information might be in the MME’s local cache, 
retrieved from another MME that the mobile device had recently contacted, or 
retrieved from the HSS in the mobile device’s home network. The mutual authen-
tication process (which we will cover in more detail in Section 8.8) ensures that 
Visited Network
PDN gateway
(P-GW)
Streaming
server
Home Network
Internet
PDN gateway
(P-GW)
Serving
gateway (S-GW)
Base
station
HSS
MME
Base
station
2
3
1
4
Figure 7.28  ♦  An example 4G/5G mobility scenario

7.6    •    Mobility Management in Practice         619
the visited network is sure about the identity of the mobile device and that the 
device can authenticate the network to which it is attaching.
•	 The MME informs the HSS in the mobile device’s home network that the mobile 
device is now resident in the visited network, and the HSS updates its database.
•	 The base station and the mobile device select parameters for the data-plane chan-
nel to be established between the mobile device and the base station (recall that a 
control plane signaling channel is already in operation).
3.	Data-plane configuration of forwarding tunnels for the mobile device. 
The MME next configures the data plane for the mobile device, as shown in 
Figure 7.29. Two tunnels are established. One tunnel is between the base station 
and a Serving Gateway in the visited network. The second tunnel is between that 
Serving Gateway and the PDN Gateway router in the mobile device’s home network. 
4G LTE implements this form of symmetric indirect routing—all traffic to/from the 
mobile device will be tunneled through the device’s home network. 4G/5G tunnels 
use the GPRS Tunneling Protocol (GTP), specified in [3GPP GTPv1-U 2019]. The 
Tunnel Endpoint ID (TEID) in the GTP header indicates which tunnel a datagram 
belongs, allowing multiple flows to be multiplexed and de-multiplexed by GTP 
between tunnel endpoints.
It is instructive to compare the configuration of tunnels in Figure 7.29 (the case 
of mobile roaming in a visited network) with that of Figure 7.18 (the case of mobility 
Visited Network
PDN gateway
(P-GW)
Streaming
server
Home Network
Internet
PDN gateway
(P-GW)
Serving
gateway (S-GW)
Base
station
MME
Base
station
Figure 7.29  ♦  Tunneling in 4G/5G networks between the Serving  
Gateway in the visited ­network and the PDN gateway  
in the home network

620         CHAPTER 7    •    WIRELESS AND MOBILE NETWORKS
only within the mobile device’s home network). We see that in both cases, the Serv-
ing Gateway is co-resident in the same network as the mobile device, but PDN Gate-
way (which is always the PDN Gateway in the mobile device’s home network) may 
be in a different network than the mobile device. This is precisely indirect routing. 
An alternative to indirect routing, known as local breakout [GSMA 2019a] has been 
specified in which the Serving Gateway establishes a tunnel to the PDN Gateway in 
the local, visited network. In practice, however, local breakout is not widely used 
[Sauter 2014].
 Once the tunnels have been configured and activated, the mobile device 
can now forward packets to/from the Internet via the PDN gateway in its home 
network!
4.	Handover management. A handover occurs when a mobile device changes 
its association from one base station to another. The handover process described 
below is the same, regardless of whether the mobile device is resident in its home 
network, or is roaming in a visited network.
As shown in Figure 7.30, datagrams to/from the device are initially (before 
handover) forwarded to the mobile through one base station (which we’ll refer to as 
the source base station), and after handover are routed to the mobile device through 
another base station (which we’ll refer to as the target base station). As we will see, 
a handover between base stations results not only in the mobile device transmitting/
receiving to/from a new base station but also in a change of the base-station side of 
the Serving-Gateway-to-base-station tunnel in Figure 7.29. In the simplest case of 
PDN gateway
(P-GW)
Serving
gateway (S-GW)
MME
Source base
station
Target base
station
5
5
7
3
1
2
4
6
Figure 7.30  ♦  Steps in handing over a mobile device from the source 
base station to the target base station

7.6    •    Mobility Management in Practice         621
handover, when the two base stations are near each other and in the same network, 
all changes occurring as a result of handover are thus relatively local. In particular, 
the PDN gateway being used by the Serving Gateway remains blissfully unaware of 
device mobility. Of course, more complicated handoff scenarios will require the use 
of more complex mechanisms [Sauter 2014; GSMA 2019a].
There may be several reasons for handover to occur. For example, the signal 
between the current base station and the mobile may have deteriorated to such an 
extent that communication is severely impaired. Or a cell may have become over-
loaded, handling a large amount of traffic; handing over mobile devices to less 
congested nearby cells may alleviate this congestion. A mobile device periodically 
measures characteristics of a beacon signal from its current base station as well as 
signals from nearby base stations that it can “hear.” These measurements are reported 
once or twice a second to the mobile device’s current (source) base station. Based on 
these measurements, the current loads of mobiles in nearby cells, and other factors, 
the source base station may choose to initiate a handover. The 4G/5G standards do 
not specify a specific algorithm to be used by a base station to determine whether or 
not to perform handover, or which target base station to choose; this is an active area 
of research [Zheng 2008; Alexandris 2016].
Figure 7.30 illustrates the steps involved when a source base station decides to 
hand over a mobile device to the target base station.
	1.	 The current (source) base station selects the target base station, and sends a 
Handover Request message to the target base station.
	2.	 The target base station checks whether it has the resources to support the mobile 
device and its quality of service requirements. If so, it pre-allocates channel 
resources (e.g., time slots) on its radio access network and other resources 
for that device. This pre-allocation of resources frees the mobile device from 
having to go through the time-consuming base-station association protocol 
discussed earlier, allowing handover to be executed as fast as possible. The 
target base station replies to the source base station with a Handover Request 
Acknowledge message, containing all the information at the target base station 
that the mobile device will need to associate with the new base station.
	3.	 The source base station receives the Handover Request Acknowledgement 
message and informs the mobile device of the target base station’s identity and 
channel access information. At this point, the mobile device can begin send-
ing/receiving datagrams to/from the new target base station. From the mobile 
device’s point of view, handover is now complete! However, there is still a bit 
of work to be done within the network.
	4.	 The source base station will also stop forwarding datagrams to the mobile 
device and instead forward any tunneled datagrams it receives to the target 
base station, which will later forward these datagrams to the mobile device.
	5.	 The target base station informs the MME that it (the target base station) will be 
the new base station servicing the mobile device. The MME, in turn, signals 

622         CHAPTER 7    •    WIRELESS AND MOBILE NETWORKS
to the Serving Gateway and the target base station to reconfigure the Serving-
Gateway-to-base-station tunnel to terminate at the target base station, rather 
than at the source base station.
	6.	 The target base station confirms back to the source base station that the tunnel 
has been reconfigured, allowing the source base station to release resources 
associated with that mobile device.
	7.	 At this point, the target base station can also begin delivering datagrams to the 
mobile device, including datagrams forwarded to the target base station by the 
source base station during handover, as well as datagrams newly arriving on 
the reconfigured tunnel from the Serving Gateway. It can also forward outgo-
ing datagrams received from the mobile device into the tunnel to the Serving 
Gateway.
The roaming configurations in today’s 4G LTE networks, such as that dis-
cussed above, will also be used in future emerging 5G networks [GSMA 2019c]. 
Recall, however, from our discussion in Section 7.4.6 that the 5G networks will be 
denser, with significantly smaller cell sizes. This will make handover an even more 
critically important network function. In addition, low handover latency will be 
critical for many real-time 5G applications. The migration of the cellular network 
control plane to the SDN framework that we studied earlier in Chapter 5 [GSMA 
2018b; Condoluci 2018] promises to enable implementations of a higher-capacity, 
lower-latency 5G cellular network control plane. The application of SDN in a 5G 
context is the subject of considerable research [Giust 2015; Ordonez-Lucena 2017; 
Nguyen 2016].
7.6.2	Mobile IP
Today’s Internet does not have any widely deployed infrastructure that provides the 
type of services for “on the go” mobile users that we encountered for 4G/5G cellular 
networks. But this is certainly not due to the lack of technical solutions for providing 
such services in an Internet setting! Indeed, the Mobile IP architecture and protocols 
[RFC 5944] that we will briefly discuss below have been standardized by Internet 
RFCs for more than 20 years, and research has continued on new, more secure and 
more generalized mobility solutions [Venkataramani 2014].
Instead, it has perhaps been the lack of motivating business and use cases [Arkko 
2012] and the timely development and deployment of alternative mobility solutions 
in cellular networks that has blunted the deployment of Mobile IP. Recall that 20 
years ago, 2G cellular networks had already provided a solution for mobile voice 
services (the “killer app” for mobile users); additionally, next generation 3G net-
works supporting voice and data were on the horizon. Perhaps the dual technology 
solution—mobile services via cellular networks when we are truly mobile and “on 
the go” (i.e., the rightmost side of the mobility spectrum in Figure 7.24) and Internet 
services via 802.11 networks or wireline networks when we are stationary or moving 

7.6    •    Mobility Management in Practice         623
locally (i.e., the leftmost side of the mobility spectrum in Figure 7.24)—that we had 
20 years ago and still have today will persist into the future.
It will nonetheless be instructive to briefly overview the Mobile IP standard 
here, as it provides many of the same services as cellular networks and implements 
many of the same basic mobility principles. Earlier editions of this textbook have 
provided a more in-depth study of Mobile IP than we will provide here; the inter-
ested reader can find this retired material on this textbook’s website. The Internet 
architecture and protocols for supporting mobility, collectively known as Mobile IP, 
are defined primarily in RFC 5944 for IPv4. Mobile IP, like 4G/5G, is a complex 
standard, and would require an entire book to describe in detail; indeed one such 
book is [Perkins 1998b]. Our modest goal here is to provide an overview of the most 
important aspects of Mobile IP.
The overall architecture and elements of Mobile IP are strikingly similar to that 
of cellular provider networks. There is a strong notion of a home network, in which a 
mobile device has a permanent IP address, and visited networks (known as “foreign” 
networks in Mobile IP), where the mobile device will be allocated a care-of-address. 
The home agent in Mobile IP has a similar function to the LTE HSS: it tracks the 
location of a mobile device by receiving updates from foreign agents in foreign net-
works visited by that mobile device, just as the HSS receives updates from Mobil-
ity Management Entities (MMEs) in visited networks in which a 4G mobile device 
resides. And both 4G/5G and Mobile IP use indirect routing to a mobile node, using 
tunnels to connect the gateway routers in the home and visited/foreign networks. 
Table 7.3 summarizes the elements of the Mobile IP architecture, along with a com-
parison with similar elements in 4G/5G networks
4G/5G element
Mobile IP element
Discussion
Home network
Home network
Visited network
Foreign network
IMSI identifier
Permanent IP address
Globally unique routable address information
Home Subscriber Service (HSS)
Home agent
Mobility Management Entity (MME)
Foreign agent
Data plane: indirect forwarding via the home 
network, with tunneling between the home 
and visited network, and tunneling within the 
network in which the mobile device resides
Data plane: indirect forwarding via 
the home network, with tunneling 
between the home and visited 
network
Base station (eNode-B)
Access Point (AP)
No specific AP technology is specified in Mobile IP
Radio Access Network
WLAN
No specific WLAN technology is specified in Mobile IP
Table 7.3  ♦  Commonalities between 4G/5G and Mobile IP architectures

624         CHAPTER 7    •    WIRELESS AND MOBILE NETWORKS
The mobile IP standard consists of three main pieces:
•	 Agent discovery. Mobile IP defines the protocols used by a foreign agent to adver-
tise its mobility services to a mobile device that wishes to attach to its network. 
Those services will include providing a care-of-address to the mobile device for 
use in the foreign network, registration of the mobile device with the home agent 
in the mobile device’s home network, and forwarding of datagrams to/from the 
mobile device, among other services.
•	 Registration with the home agent. Mobile IP defines the protocols used by the 
mobile device and/or foreign agent to register and deregister a care-of-address 
with a mobile device’s home agent.
•	 Indirect routing of datagrams. Mobile IP also defines the manner in which data-
grams are forwarded to mobile devices by a home agent, including rules for for-
warding datagrams and handling error conditions, and several forms of tunneling 
[RFC 2003, RFC 2004].
Again, our coverage here of Mobile IP has been intentionally brief. The inter-
ested reader should consult the references in this section, or more-detailed discus-
sions of Mobile IP in earlier editions of this textbook.
7.7	 Wireless and Mobility: Impact on  
­Higher-Layer Protocols
In this chapter, we’ve seen that wireless networks differ significantly from their 
wired counterparts at both the link layer (as a result of wireless channel charac-
teristics such as fading, multipath, and hidden terminals) and at the network layer 
(as a result of mobile users who change their points of attachment to the network). 
But are there important differences at the transport and application layers? It’s tempt-
ing to think that these differences will be minor, since the network layer provides the 
same best-effort delivery service model to upper layers in both wired and wireless 
networks. Similarly, if protocols such as TCP or UDP are used to provide transport-
layer services to applications in both wired and wireless networks, then the applica-
tion layer should remain unchanged as well. In one sense, our intuition is right—TCP 
and UDP can (and do) operate in networks with wireless links. On the other hand, 
transport protocols in general, and TCP in particular, can sometimes have very dif-
ferent performance in wired and wireless networks, and it is here, in terms of perfor-
mance, that differences are manifested. Let’s see why.
Recall that TCP retransmits a segment that is either lost or corrupted on the path 
between sender and receiver. In the case of mobile users, loss can result from either 
network congestion (router buffer overflow) or from handover (e.g., from delays 
in rerouting segments to a mobile’s new point of attachment to the network). In all 

7.7    •    Wireless and Mobility: Impact on ­Higher-Layer Protocols          625
cases, TCP’s receiver-to-sender ACK indicates only that a segment was not received 
intact; the sender is unaware of whether the segment was lost due to congestion, 
during handover, or due to detected bit errors. In all cases, the sender’s response is 
the same—to retransmit the segment. TCP’s congestion-control response is also the 
same in all cases—TCP decreases its congestion window, as discussed in Section 3.7. 
By unconditionally decreasing its congestion window, TCP implicitly assumes that 
segment loss results from congestion rather than corruption or handover. We saw in 
Section 7.2 that bit errors are much more common in wireless networks than in wired 
networks. When such bit errors occur or when handover loss occurs, there’s really 
no reason for the TCP sender to decrease its congestion window (and thus decrease 
its sending rate). Indeed, it may well be the case that router buffers are empty and 
packets are flowing along the end-to-end path unimpeded by congestion.
Researchers realized in the early to mid 1990s that given high bit error rates on 
wireless links and the possibility of handover loss, TCP’s congestion-control response 
could be problematic in a wireless setting. Three broad classes of approaches are 
possible for dealing with this problem:
•	 Local recovery. Local recovery protocols recover from bit errors when and where 
(e.g., at the wireless link) they occur, for example, the 802.11 ARQ protocol we 
studied in Section 7.3, or more sophisticated approaches that use both ARQ and 
FEC [Ayanoglu 1995] that we saw in use in 4G/5G networks in Section 7.4.2.
•	 TCP sender awareness of wireless links. In the local recovery approaches, the 
TCP sender is blissfully unaware that its segments are traversing a wireless link. 
An alternative approach is for the TCP sender and receiver to be aware of the 
existence of a wireless link, to distinguish between congestive losses occurring 
in the wired network and corruption/loss occurring at the wireless link, and to 
invoke congestion control only in response to congestive wired-network losses. 
[Liu 2003] investigates techniques for distinguishing between losses on the wired 
and wireless segments of an end-to-end path. [Huang 2013] provides insights on 
developing transport protocol mechanisms and applications that are more LTE-
friendly.
•	 Split-connection approaches. In a split-connection approach [Bakre 1995], the 
end-to-end connection between the mobile user and the other end point is broken 
into two transport-layer connections: one from the mobile host to the wireless 
access point, and one from the wireless access point to the other communication 
end point (which we’ll assume here is a wired host). The end-to-end connection 
is thus formed by the concatenation of a wireless part and a wired part. The trans-
port layer over the wireless segment can be a standard TCP connection [Bakre 
1995], or a specially tailored error recovery protocol on top of UDP. [Yavatkar 
1994] investigates the use of a transport-layer selective repeat protocol over the 
wireless connection. Measurements reported in [Wei 2006] indicate that split TCP 
connections have been widely used in cellular data networks, and that significant 
improvements can indeed be made through the use of split TCP connections.

626         CHAPTER 7    •    WIRELESS AND MOBILE NETWORKS
Our treatment of TCP over wireless links has been necessarily brief here. 
­In-depth surveys of TCP challenges and solutions in wireless networks can be found 
in [Hanabali 2005; Leung 2006]. We encourage you to consult the references for 
details of this ongoing area of research.
Having considered transport-layer protocols, let us next consider the effect of 
wireless and mobility on application-layer protocols. Because of the shared nature of 
the wireless spectrum, applications that operate over wireless links, particularly over 
cellular wireless links, must treat bandwidth as a scarce commodity. For example, a 
Web server serving content to a Web browser executing on a 4G smartphone will 
likely not be able to provide the same image-rich content that it gives to a browser 
operating over a wired connection. Although wireless links do provide challenges at 
the application layer, the mobility they enable also makes possible a rich set of loca-
tion-aware and context-aware applications [Baldauf 2007]. More generally, wireless 
and mobile networks will continue to play a key role in realizing the ubiquitous com-
puting environments of the future [Weiser 1991]. It’s fair to say that we’ve only seen 
the tip of the iceberg when it comes to the impact of wireless and mobile networks on 
networked applications and their protocols!
7.8	 Summary
Wireless and mobile networks first revolutionized telephony and are now having 
an increasingly profound impact in the world of computer networks as well. With 
their anytime, anywhere, untethered access into the global network infrastructure, 
they are not only making network access more ubiquitous, they are also enabling an 
exciting new set of location-dependent services. Given the growing importance of 
wireless and mobile networks, this chapter has focused on the principles, common 
link technologies, and network architectures for supporting wireless and mobile 
communication.
We began this chapter with an introduction to wireless and mobile networks, 
drawing an important distinction between the challenges posed by the wireless nature 
of the communication links in such networks, and by the mobility that these wireless 
links enable. This allowed us to better isolate, identify, and master the key concepts in 
each area. We focused first on wireless communication, considering the characteristics 
of a wireless link in Section 7.2. In Sections 7.3 and 7.4, we examined the link-level 
aspects of the IEEE 802.11 (WiFi) wireless LAN standard, Bluetooth, and 4G/5G 
cellular neworks. We then turned our attention to the issue of mobility. In Section 7.5, 
we identified several forms of mobility, with points along this spectrum posing dif-
ferent challenges and admitting different solutions. We considered the problems of 
locating and routing to a mobile user, as well as approaches for handing over the 
mobile user who dynamically moves from one point of attachment to the network to 
another. We examined how these issues were addressed in 4G/5G networks and in the 

HOMEWORK PROBLEMS AND QUESTIONS         627
Mobile IP standard. Finally, we considered the impact of wireless links and mobility 
on transport-layer protocols and networked applications in ­Section 7.7.
Although we have devoted an entire chapter to the study of wireless and mobile 
networks, an entire book (or more) would be required to fully explore this exciting 
and rapidly expanding field. We encourage you to delve more deeply into this field 
by consulting the many references provided in this chapter.
Homework Problems and Questions